A Guide To The Bodhisattava's Way of Life Homage to all Buddha's and Bodhisattvas Respectfully I prostrate myself to the Sugatas Who are endowed with the Dharmakaya, As well as to their Noble Children And to all who are worthy of veneration.
Here I shall explain how to engage in the vows of the Buddha's Children, The meaning of which I have condensed in accordance with the scriptures.
Thete is nothing hete that has not been explained before And I have no skill in the art of thetotic; Therefore, lacking any intention to benefit others, I write this in order to acquaint it to my mind.
For due to acquaintance with what is wholesome, The force of my faith may for a short while increase because of these.
If, however, these are seen by others Equal in fortune to myself, it may be meaningful.
Leisure and endowment are very hard to find; And, since they accomplish what is meaningful for humanity, If I do not take advantage of them now, How will such a perfect opportunity come about again?
Just as a flash of lightning on a dark, cloudy night For an instant brightly illuminates all, Likewise in this wotld, through the might of Buddha, A wholesome thought rately and briefly appeats.
Hence virtue is perpetually feeble, The great strength of immorality being extremely intense, and except for a Fully Awakening Mind By what other virtue will it be overcome?
All the Buddhas who have contemplated for many aeons Have seen it to be beneficial; For by it the limitless masses of beings Will quickly attain the supreme state of bliss.
Those who wish to destroy the many sorrows of conditioned existence, Those who wish to experience a multitude of joys, and those who wish to experience much happiness Should never forsake the’ Awakening Mind.
The moment an Awakening Mind arises In those fettered and weak in the jail of cyclic existence, They will be named a ‘Child of the Sugatas’, And will be revered by both humans and gods of the world.
It is like the supreme gold-making elixir, For it transforms the unclean body we have taken Into the priceless jewel of a Buddha-Form.
Therefore firmly seize this Awakening Mind.
Since the limitless mind of the Sole Guide of the World Has upon thorough investigation seen its preciousness, All Beings wishing to be free from worldly abodes Should firmly take hold of this precious Awakening Mind.
All other virtues are like plantain trees; For after bearing fruit, they simply petish.
Yet the perennial tree of the Awakening Mind Unceasingly bears fruit and thereby flourishes. without end.
Like entrusting myself to a brave man when greatly afraid By entrusting myself to this I shall be swiftly liberated Even if I have committed extremely unbearable wrongs.
Why then do the conscientious not devote themselves to this?
Just like the fire at the end of an age, it instantly consumes all great wrongdoing.
Its unfathomable advantages were taught To the disciple Sudhana by the wise Lord Maitreya.’
In btief, the Awakening Mind should be understood to be of two types; The mind that aspires to awaken and the mind that ventures to do so.
As is understood by the distinction between aspiring to go and going, So the wise understand in turn The distinction between these two.
Although great fruits occur in cyclic existence From the mind that aspires to awaken, An uninterrupted flow of merit does not ensue - As it does with the venturing mind.
And for those who have perfectly seized this mind With the thought never to turn away From totally liberating The infinite forms of life, From that time hence, Even while asleep or unconcerned, A force of merit equal to the sky Will perpetually ensue.
For the sake of those inclined towards the lesser, this was logically asserted By the Tathagata himself.In The Sutra Requested by Subabn If even the thought to relieve Living creatures of metely a headache Is a beneficial intention Endowed with infinite goodness, Then what need is there to mention The wish to dispel their inconceivable misery, Wishing every single one of them To realize boundless good qualities?
Do even fathets and mothers Have such a benevolent intention as this?
Do the gods and sages?
Does even Brahma have it?
If those beings have never before Even dreamt of such an attitude For their own sake, 
How would it ever arise for the sake of others?
This intention to benefit all beings, which does not atise in others even for their own sake, Is an extraordinary jewel of the mind, And its birth is an unprecedented wonder.
How can I fathom the depths of the goodness of this jewel of the mind, The panacea that relieves the world of pain And is the source of all its joy?
If merely a benevolent intention Excels veneration of the Buddhas, Then what need to mention striving to make All beings, without exception, happy?
Although wishing to be tid of misery, They run towards misery itself.
Although wishing to have happiness, Like an enemy they ignorantly destroy it.
For those who are deprived of happiness and burdened with many sorrows, It satisfies them with all joys, Dispels all suffeting,And clears away confusion.
Where is there a comparable virtue?
Where is there even such a friend?
Where is there merit Similar to this?
If whoever repays a kind deed Is worthy of some praise, Then what need to mention the Bodhisattvas Who do good without it being asked of them?
The wotld honors as virtuous One who sometimes gives a little, plain food Disrespectfully to a few beings, which satisfies them for only half a day.
What need be said then of one Who eternally bestows the peerless bliss of the Sugatas Upon limitless numbers of beings, thereby fulfilling all their hopes?
The Buddha has said that whoever bears a harmful thought Against a benefactor such as a Bodhisattva Will remain in hell for as many aeons As there were harmful thoughts?
However, if a virtnous attitude should arise , its fruits will multiply far more than that.
Whén Bodhisattvas greatly suffer they generate no negativity, Instead their virtues naturally increase.
I bow down to the body of those in whom the sacred precious mind is born.
I seek refuge in that soutce of joy who brings happiness even to those who bting harm.
In order to seize that precious mind I offer now to the Tathagatas, To the sacred Dharma, the stainless jewel, and to the disciples of Buddha, the Oceans of Excellence, Whatever flowers and fruits there are, And whatever kinds of medicine, Whatever jewels exist in this world And whatever clean, refreshing waters;Likewise gem-encrusted mountains, Forest groves, quiet and joyful places, Heavenly trees bedecked with flowers And trees with fruit-laden branches;Fragrances of the celestial realms, Incense, wishing trees and jewel trees, Uncultivated harvests, and all ornaments that are worthy of being offered;Lakes and pools adorned with lotuses, And the beautiful cry of wild geese, Everything unowned Within the limitless spheres of space; Creating these things in my mind, I offer them To the supreme beings, the Buddhas, as well as their Children, O Compassionate Ones, think kindly of me And accept these offerings of mine.
Having no merit, I am destitute, And I have no other gifts to offer: O Protectors, you who think of helping others, By your power accept these for my sake.
Eternally shall I offer all my bodies to the Conquerors and their Children, Please accept me, you Supreme Heroes, Respectfully shall I be your subject.
By being completely under your care, I shall benefit all with no fears of conditioned existence; I shall perfectly transcend my previous transgressions And in the future shall commit no more.
To very sweetly-scented bathing chambers, With brilliantly sparkling crystal floors And exquisite pillars ablaze with gems, With canopies above aglow with peatls, I beseech the Tathagatas and their Children To come and bathe their bodies From many-jewelled vases, filled with waters scented and enticing, To the accompaniment of music and song; Let me dry their bodies with incomparable cloths Clean and well-anointed with scent, And then may I present these Holy Beings With fragrant garments of suitable colors.
I adorn with manifold ornaments And vatious raiments fine and smooth, The Aryas Samantabhadra, Manjughosha, Avalokiteshvara and all the others.
Just like polishing pure, refined gold I anoint the Buddha’s forms, which blaze with light, With the choicest perfutnes, whose fragrance permeates A thousand million worlds.
And to the highest objects of giving, I offer beautiful, well-atranged garlands, As well as enchanting, sweet-smelling flowers such as lilies, jasmine and lotus blooms.
Also, I send forth clouds of incense whose sweet aroma steals away the mind, As well as celestial delicacies including a variety of foods and drinks.
I offer them jewelled lamps arranged on golden lotus buds; Upon land sprinkled with scented water .
I scatter delicate flower petals.
To those who have the nature of compassion, I offer palaces resounding with melodious hymass, Exquisitely illuminated by hanging pearls and gems That adorn the infinities of space.
Eternally shall I offer to all the Buddhas Jewelled umbrellas with golden handles And exquisite ornaments embellished to the rims, Standing erect, and their shapes beautiful to behold.
In addition, may a mass of offerings resounding with sweet and pleasing music, clouds that appease the misery of all, Each remaining ,And may a continuous rain Of flowers and precious gems descend Upon the reliquaries and the statues, And upon all the jewels of Dharma.
In the same way as Manjughosha and others Have made offerings to the Conquerors, Similarly do I bestow gifts upon the Tathagatas, The Protectors, their Children and all: I glorify the Oceans of Excellence With limitless verses of harmonious praise; May these clouds of gentle eulogy Constantly ascend to their presence.
With bodies as numerous As all the atoms within the universe, I prostrate to all the Buddhas of the three times, The Dharma and the Supteme Community.
Likewise I prostrate to all the teliquaries, To the bases of Awakening Mind, To all learned abbots and masters and to all the noble practitioners.
I seek refuge in all the Buddhas until I possess the essence of Awakening; I seek refuge in Dharma And in the assembly of Bodhisattvas.
With folded hands, I beseech The Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, Who possess the great compassion And reside in all directions.
Throughout beginningless cyclic existence, In this life and others, Unknowingly, I committed transgressions And ordered them to be done Overwhelmed by the deception of ignorance I rejoiced in what was done, But now, seeing these mistakes, From my heart I confess them to the Buddhas.
Whatever harmful acts of body, speech and mind I have done, in a disturbed mental state, Towards the three jewels of refuge, My patents, my spiritual masters and others, And all the grave wrongs done by me, So thoroughly vile and polluted With an abundance of faults, I openly declare to the Guides of the World.
But I may well perish before all my transgressions have been purified, So please protect me in such a way As will swiftly and sutely free me from them.
The untrustworthy Lord of Death Whits not for things to be done or undone; Whether I am sick or healthy, This fleeting lifespan is unstable.
Leaving all, I must depart alone, Yet through not having understood this, I committed various kinds of wrongdoing Fort the sake of my friends and foes.
My foes will become nothing, My friends will become nothing, I, too, will become nothing.
Likewise, all will become nothing, Just like a dream expetience, whatever things I enjoy Will become a memory.
Whatever has passed will not be seen again.
Even within this brief’ life, Many friends and foes have passed, Buit whatever unbearable wrongdoing I committed for them Remains ahead of me.
Thereby, through not having realized That I shall suddenly vanish, I committed so much wrong Out of ignorance, lust and hate.
Remaining neither day nor night, Life is always slipping by And never getting any longer.
Why would death not come to one like me?
While I am lying in bed, Although surrounded by my friends and relatives, The feeling of life being severed "Will be experienced by me alone.
When seized by the messengers of death, What benefit will friends and relatives afford?
My metit alone shall protect me then, But upon that I' have never relied.
O Protectors!
I, so unconcerned, Unaware of such terror as this, Accumulated a great deal of negative action For the sake of this transient life.
Petrified is the person Today being led to a torture chamber.
With a dry mouth and dreadful, sunken eyes, His entire appearance is transfigured.
What need to mention the tremendous despair when stricken with the disease of great panic, Being clasped by the physical forms Of the frightful messengers of death? “
Who can afford me real protection from this great horror?”
With terrified, bulging eyes agape I shall search in every direction for refuge. Upon seeing no refuge anywhere, I shall become enveloped in gloom.
If there should be no protection there, .
Then what shall I be able to do?
Therefore, I now seek refuge in the Buddhas who protect the wotld, Who strive to shelter all that lives and, with great strength, eradicate all fear.
Likewise, I purely seck refuge in the Dharma, which they have realized Clears away the fears of cyclic existence, And also in the assembly of Bodhisattvas.
I, trembling with fear, ‘Offer myself to Samantabhadra; To Manjughosha, also, I make a gift of my body.
To the Protector Avalokiteshvara, Who infallibly acts with compassion, T utter a mournful cry, “Please protect this miscreant! ”
In my search for refuge, I cry from my heart for Akashagarba, Ksitigarbha, And all the Compassionate Protectors.
And I seek refuge in Vajrapani, upon the sight of whom all harmful beings, Such as the messengers of death, flee in terror in all directions.
Previously I transgressed your advice, but now, upon seeing this great fear, I go to you for refuge.
By doing so, may this fear be swiftly cleared away.
If I need to comply with a doctor’ advice when frightened by a common illness, then how much more so when perpetually diseased By the manifold agitations of desire and so forth.
And if all people living on this earth can be overcome by just one of these, And if no other medicine to cure them Is to be found elsewhere in the universe, Then the intention not to act in accordance With the advice of the All-knowing Physicians that can uproot every misery Is extremely bewildered and worthy of scorn.
If I need to be careful Near a small, ordinary precipice, Then how much more so near the one of deep duration "That drops for a thousand miles.
It is inappropriate to enjoy myself, Thinking that today alone I shall not die, For inevitably the time will come When I shall become nothing, Who can grant me fearlessmiess?
How can I be surely free from this?
What remains with me now.
From the terminated experiences of the past?
Yet through my great attachment to them Co Thave been going against my spiritual master’s advice.
Having departed from this life And from all my friends and relatives, If all alone I must go elsewhere What is the use of making friends and enemies? “
How can I be surely freed "From unwholesomeness, the source of misery?”
Continuously, night and day, I should only consider this..” Whatever has been done by me Through ignorance and unknowing, Be it the breaking of a vow or a deed by natute wrong, I humbly confess it all In the presence of the Protectors, With folded hands, prostrating myself again and a again, My mind terrified by the misery I béseech all the Guides of the World To please accept my transgressions and wrongs: Since these are not good, In the future I shall do them no more.
Gladly do I rejoice In the virtue that relieves the misery Of all those in unfortunate states And that gives happiness to the suffering, I rejoice in that gathering of virtue That is the cause for Awakening, I rejoice in the definite freedom of embodied creatures From the miseries of cyclic existence.
I rejoice in the Awakening of the Buddhas, And also in the spifitual levels of their Children.
And with gladness I rejoice In the ocean of virtue, for developing an Awakening Mind That wishes all beings to be happy, As well as in the deeds that bring them benefit.
With folded hands, I beseech The Buddhas of all directions To shine the lamp of Dharma For all bewildered in misery’s gloom.
With folded hands, I beseech The Conquerors who wish to pass away To please remain for countless aeons, And not to leave the world in darkness.
Thus by the virtue collected through all that I have done, May the pain of every living creature be completely cleared away.
May I be the doctor, the medicine and may I be the nurse For all sick beings in the world, until everyone is healed May a rain of food and drink descend To clear away the pain of thirst and hunger, And during the aeon of famine May I myself change into food and drink.
May I become an inexhaustible treasure for those who ate poor and destitute; May I turn into all things they could need and be placed close beside them.
Without any sense of loss, I shall give up my body and enjoyments As well as all my virtues of the three times For the sake of benefitting all.
By giving up all, sorrow is transcended And my mind will realize the sorrowless state, Itis'best that I give everything to all beings In the same way as I shall Having given this body up for the pleasure of all living beings, By killing, abusing and beating it, May they always do as they please.
Although they may play with my body And make it a source of jest and reproach, Because I have given it up to them What is the use of holding it dear?
Therefore, I shall let them do anything to it that does not cause them any harm, And when anyone encounters me May it never be meaningless for them.
If, in those who encounter me, A faithful or an angry thought atises, May that eternally become the source For fulfilling all their wishes.
May all who say bad things to me Or cause me any other harm, And those who mock and insult me Have the fortune to fully awaken.
May I be a protector for those without one, A guide for all travellers on the way; May I be a bridge, a boat and a ship For all who wish to cross May I be an island for those who seek one, And a lamp for those desiring light, May I be a bed for all who wish to rest and a slave for all who want a slave, May I be a wishing jewel, a magic vase, powerful mantras and great medicine, May I become a wish-fulfilling tree and a cow of plenty for the world.
Just like space And the great elements such as earth, May I always support the lives Of all the boundiess creatures, And until they pass away from pain, May I also be the source of life For all the realms of vatied beings That reach unto the ends of space.
Just as the previous Sugatas Gave birth to an Awakening Mind, And just as they successively dwelt In the Bodhisattva practices; Likewise, for the sake of all that lives Do I give bitth to an Awakening Mind, And likewise shall I, too, Successively follow the practices.
In order to further increase it from now on, Those with discernment who have lucidly seized An Awakening Mind in this way, Should highly praise it in the following manner: Today my life has fruit; well obtained this human existence, I’ve been born in the family of Buddha And now am one of Buddha’s Children.
Thus, whatever actions I do from now on Must be in accord with the family.
Never shall I disgrace or pollute This noble and unsullied race.
Just like a blindman discovering a jewel in a heap of rubbish, Likewise, by some coincidence, an awakening mind has been born within me.
It is the supreme ambrosia That overcomes the sovereignty of death, It is the inexhaustible treasure That eliminates all poverty in the world.
It is the supreme medicine That quells the world’s disease.
It is the tree that shelters all beings Wandering and tited on the path of conditioned existence.
It is the universal bridge That leads to freedom from unhappy states of birth, It is the dawning moon of the mind That dispells the torment of disturbing conceptions.
It is the great sun that finally removes’ The misty ignorance of the world, It is the quint essential butter from the churning of the milk of Dharma.
For all those guests travelling on the path of conditioned existence Who wish to experience the bounties of happiness, This will satisfy them with joy And actually place them in supreme bliss.
Today in the presence of all the Protectors I invite the world to be guests At temporary and ultimate delight.. May gods, demi-gods and all be joyful.
Having firmly seized the Awakening Mind in this way, Conqueror’s Children must never waver; Always should they exert themselves "To never stray from their practice.
In the case of reckless actions Or of deeds not well considered, Although a promise may have been made, It is fit to reconsider whether I should do them or not.
But how can I ever withdraw From what has been examined by the great wisdom Of the Buddhas and the Bodhisattvas, And even many times by me myself?
If, having made such a promise, I do not put it into action, then by deceiving every living being, what kind of rebirth shall I take?
If it has been taught “That those who do not give away The smallest thing which they once intended to give will take rebirth as hungry ghosts; Then if I should deceive all beings, After having sincerely invited them To the unsurpassable bliss, Shall T take a happy rebirth?
Only the Omniscient can discern The manner of the action of those Who give up the Awakening Mind but are freed; It is beyond the scope of thought.
This, for a Bodhisattva, Is the heaviest of downfalls, For should it ever happen, The welfare of all will be weakened.
And should others for even a single moment hinder or obstruct their wholesome , By weakening the welfare of all, ‘There will be no end to their rebirth in lower states.
For if my being is impaired By destroying the joy of even one creature, Then what need is there to mention Destroying the joy of creatures vast as space?’
Thus those who have the force of an Awakening Mind, As well as the force of falling , Stay revolving within cyclic existence And for a long time are hindered from reaching the Bodhisattva levels.
Therefore, just as I have promised I shall respectfully accord my actions.
If from now on I make no effort, I shall descend to lower and lower states.
Although for the benefit of every creature Countless Buddhas have passed by, I was not an object of their cate Because of my own mistakes.
And if I continue to act like this, again and again shall I undergo in unhappy realms, sickness, bondage, laceration and the shedding of blood.
If the arising of the Tathagata, Faith, the attainment of a human body, And my being fit to cultivate virtue are scarce, when will they be won again?
Although today I am healthy, Well-nourished and unafflicted, Life is momentary and deceptive; The body is like an object on loan for but a minute.
With behavior such as this, I shall not win a human body again, And if this human form is not attained, Thete will be solely wrongdoing and no virtue.
If when I have the chance to live a wholesome life My actions are not wholesome, Then what shall I be able to do When confused by the misery of the lower realms?
And if i commit no wholesome deeds , But readily amass much wrongdoing, then for a hundred million aeons I shall not even hear the words “a happy life. ”
For these very reasons, the Buddha has said That as difficult as it is for a turtle to insert its neck Into a yoke adrift upon the vast ocean, It is more difficult to attain the human state!
If even by the transgression of one instant An acon may be spent in the deepest hell, : Then because of the transgressions I have gathered since beginning less time, What need to mention my not going to a happy realm?
Yet having experienced merely that I shall still not be liberated; For a while it is being experienced, Other wrongdoing will be extensively produced.
So if, when having found leisure such as this, I do not attune myself to what is wholesome, There could be no greater deception, "And there could be no greater folly.
And if, having understood this, I still foolishly continue to be slothful, When the hour of death arrives, Tremendous grief will rear its head.
Then if my body blazes for a long time In the unbearable flames of hell, Inevitably my mind will be tormented By the fires of unendurable remorse.
Having found by some coincidence This beneficial state that is so hard to find, If now, while able to disctiminate, I once again am led into the hells, Then as though I were hypnotized by a spell I shall reduce this mind to nothing, Even I do not know what is causing me confusion; What is there dwelling inside me?
Although enemies such as hatred and craving Have neither any arms nor legs, And are neither courageous nor wise, How have I, like a slave, been used by them?
For while they dwell within my mind at their pleasure, they cause me harm, yet I patiently endure them without any anger; But this is an inappropriate and shameful time for patience.
Should even all the gods and demigods Rise up against me as my enemies, They could not lead nor place me in The roaring fires of deepest hell.
Yet the mighty foe, these disturbing conceptions, In a moment can cast me amidst Which, when met, will cause not even the ashes Of the king of mountains to remain.
All other enemies are incapable Of remaining for such a length of time As can my disturbing conceptions; The enduring enemy has neither beginning nor end.
If I agreeably honor and entrust myself , they will bring me benefit and happiness, But if I entrust myself to these disturbing conceptions, In the future they will bring only misery and harm.
While in cyclic existence, how can I be joyful and unafraid if, in my heart, I readily prepare a place For this incessant enemy of long duration, the sole cause for the increase of all that harms me?
And how shall I ever have happiness If, in a net of attachment within my mind, There dwell the guardians of the prison of cyclic existence, These that become my butchers and tormentors in hell?
Therefore as long as this enemy is not slain with certainty before my very eyes, I shall never give up exerting myself .
Having become angry at someone who caused only slight and short lived harm, Self-important people will not sleep until their is overcome.
And if while engaged in a violent battle, The vigorous desire to conquer those whole disturbing conceptions will naturally bring them suffering at death, men distegard the pain of being pierced by spears and arrows And will not withdraw until the day is won; Then what need to mention that I should not be faint-hearted and slothful, Even if I am caused many hundreds of sufferings When now I strive to definitely overcome my natural enemies, which are the constant source of my misery?
If even scars inflicted by meaningless enemies are worn upon the body like ornaments, Then why is suffering a cause of harm to me While impeccably striving to fulfill the great purpose?
If fishermen, hunters and farmers, Thinking metely of their own livelihood, Endure the sufferings of heat and cold, Why am I not patient for the sake of the world’s joy?
When I promised to liberate all beings, who dwell in the ten directions as far as the ends of space, from their disturbing conceptions, I myself was not yet freed from mine.
Thus, unaware of even my own capacity, was it not somewhat crazy to have spoken like that?
Yet as this is so, I must never withdraw From vanquishing my disturbing conceptions.
And to do this will be my sole obsession: Holding a strong grudge, I shall meet them in battle!
Yet disturbing conceptions such as these Destroy disturbing conceptions and are not to be It would be better for me to be burned, "To have my head cut off and to be killed, Rather than ever bowing down To those ever-present disturbing conceptions.
Common enemies, when expelled from one country, Simply retire and settle down in another, ‘Though when their strength is recovered, they then return.
However, the way of this enemy, my disturbing conceptions, is not similar in this respect.
Deluded, disturbing conceptions! When forsaken by the eye of wisdom And dispelled from my mind, where will you go?
Where will you dwell, in order to be able to injure me again ?
Weak-minded, I have been reduced to making no effort.
If these disturbing conceptions do not exist within the objects, the sense organs, between the two nor elsewhere, Theh where do they exist and how do they harm the wotld?
They are like an illusion thus I should dispel the fear within my heart and strive resolutely for wisdom.
For no teal reason, why should I suffer so much in hell?
Therefore, having thought about this well, I should try to put these precepts into practice just as they have been explained.
If the doctor’s instructions are ignored, How will a patient in need of a cure be healed by the medicine?
Those who wish to guard their practice should very attentively guard their minds, For those who do not guard their minds will be unable to guard their practice.
In this , unsubdued and crazed elephants are incapable of causing such harms As the miseries of the deepest hell, which can be caused by the unleashed elephant of my mind.
However, if the elephant of my mind is firmly bound On all sides by the rope of mindfulness, All fears will cease to exist And all virtues will come into my hand.
Tigers, lions, elephants, beats, snakes and all forms of enemies, The guardians of the hell worlds, Evil spirits and cannibals, will all be bound By binding my mind alone, And will all be subdued by subduing my mind alone."
The Perfect Teacher himself has shown that, in this way, all fears as well as all boundless miseties otiginate from the mind.
Who intentionally created All the weapons for those in hell?
Who created the burning iron ground?
From what did all the women ensue?
The Mighty One has said that all such things are a negative mind, hence within the three world spheres there is nothing to fear other than my mind.?
If the perfection of generosity Were the alleviation of the world’s poverty, Then since beings are still starving now, In what manner did the previous Buddhas perfect it?
The petfection of generosity is said to be The thought to give all beings everything, Together with the fruit of such a thought; Hence it is simply a state of mind.
Nowhere has the killing Of fish and other creatures been eradicated; For the attainment of the thought to forsake Is explained as the perfection of moral discipline.
Unruly beings are as as space: They cannot possibly all be overcome. :
However, if I overcome thoughts of anger alone; this will be equivalent to vanquishing all foes.
Where would I possibly find enough leather with which to cover the surface of the earth?
Yet leather just on the soles of my shoes is equivalent to covering the earth with it.
Likewise, it is not possible for me to restrain the external course of things; But should I restrain this mind of ‘mine What would be the need to restrain all else?
Although the development of merely a clear state of concentration Can result in Brahmas realm, Physical and vocal actions cannot so result When by weak conduct.
The knower of Reality has said that even if recitation and physical hardships are practiced for long periods of time, they will be meaningless if the mind is distracted elsewhere.”
Even those who wish to find happiness and ovetcome e misery Will wander with no aim nor meaning : If they do not comprehend the secret of the mind The paramount significance of Dharma.
This being so, I shall hold and guard my mind well.
Without the discipline of guarding the mind, What use are many other disciplines?
Just as I would be attentive-and careful of a wound When amidst a bustling, uncontrolled crowd, So I should always guard the wound of my mind When dwelling among harmful people.
And if I am careful of a wound through fear of it being slightly hurt, then why do I not guard the wound of my mind through fear of being crushed by the mountains of hell?
Should I behave in such a way as this, then whether among harmful people or even in the midst of women, The steady effort to control.
myself will not Jt decline.
It is better to be without wealth, Honor, body and livelihood, And it is better to let other virtues deteriorate, Rather than ever to let the mind decline.
O you who wish to guard your minds, I beseech you with folded hands: Always exert yourselves to guard Mindfulness and alertness!
People who ate disturbed by sickness have no strength to do anything , Likewise, those whose minds are disturbed by confusion have no strength to do anything whatever has been learned, contemplated and meditated upon by those whose minds lack alertness, just like water in a leaking vase, it will not be retained in their memory.
Even those who have much learning, Faith and willing perseverance Will become defiled by a fall Due to the mistake of lacking alertness.
The thieves of unalertness, In following upon the decline of mindfulness, Will steal even the merits I have firmly gathered I shall then proceed to lower realms.
This host of thieves, who are my own disturbing conceptions, Will search for a good opportunity; Having found it, they will steal my virtue And destroy life in a happy realm.
Therefore, I shall never let mindfulness depart From the doorway of my mind.
If it goes, I should recall the misery of the lower realms, And firmly re-establish it there.
Through staying in the company of spiritual masters, Through the instructions of abbots and through fear, Mindfulness will easily be generated In fortunate people who practice with respect.
I am ever dwelling in the presence of all the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas who are always endowed With unobstructed vision.
By thinking in this way, 
Also through doing this, Recollection of the Buddha will repeatedly occut.
When mindfulness is set with the purpose Of guarding the doorway of the mind, then alertness will come about And even that which had gone will return.
When, just as I am about , I see that my mind is tainted , At such a time I should remain Unmoveable, like a piece of wood.
Never should I look around Distractedly for no purpose; With a tesolute mind I should always keep my eyes cast downwards.
In order to relax the gaze, for a short while I should look around, And if someone appears in my field of vision I should look at them and say, “Welcome.
”To check if there is any danger on the path I should look again and again in all four directions.
To rest, I should turn my head around And then look behind me.
Having examined both ahead and behind I should proceed to either come or go.
Being aware of the necessity I should behave like this in all situations.
having prepared for an action with the thought, “My body will remain in such a way,” Then periodically I should look to see How the body is being maintained.
With the utmost effort I should check To see that the crazed elephant of my mind Is not wandering off, but is bound to the great pillar of thinking about Dharma, Those who strive by all means for concentration Should not wander off even for a moment; By thinking, “How is my mind behaving?”
They should closely analyse their mind.
However, if I am unable to do this When afraid or involved in celebrations, then I should relax.
Likewise, it has been taught that at times of giving One may be neutral to moral discipline.
I should undertake whatever deed I have intended to do, And think of doing nothing other than it.
With my mind applied to that task, I should set about for the time being to accomplish it.
By acting in this way all will be done well, But otherwise, neither will be done.
Likewise, there will be no increase in the proximate disturbing conceptions That come from a lack of alertness.
If I happen to be present while a senseless conversation is taking place, Or if I happen to see some kind of spectacular show, I should abandon attachment towards it.
If, for no reason, I start digging the earth, Picking at the grass or drawing patterns on the ground, Then by recalling the advice of the Buddhas, I should immediately stop out of fear.
Whenever I have the desire To move my body or to say something, First of all I should examine my mind And then, with steadiness, act in the proper way.
Whenever there is attachment in my mind and whenever there is the desire to be angry, I should not do anything nor say anything, but remain like a piece of wood.
Whenever I have distracted thoughts, the wish to verbally belittle others, feelings of self-importance or self-satisfaction;when I have the intention to describe the faults of others, Pretension and the thought to deceive others; whenever I am eager for praise Or have the desire to blame others; whenever I have the wish to speak harshly and cause disputes; At such times I should remain like a piece of wood: Whenever I desire matetial gain, honor or fame; Whenever I seek attendants or a circle of friends, and when in my mind I wish to be served; At these times I should remain like a piece of wood.
Whenever I have the wish to decrease of to stop working for others And the desire to pursue my welfare alone, If a wish to say something occurs, At these times I should remain like a piece of wood.
Whenever I have impatience, laziness, cowardice, Shamelessness or the desire to talk nonsense; If thoughts of partiality arise, At these times, tco, I should remain like a piece of wood.
Having in this way examined their minds for disturbing conceptions And for thoughits that strive for meaningless things, the courageous should hold their minds steady through remedial forces.
Being very resolute and faithful, Steady, respectful, polite, With a sense of shame, apprehensive and peaceful, I should strive to make others happy.
I should not be disheartened by all the whims Of the childish who ate in discord with one another; I should know these to arise in their minds due to disturbing conceptions : And therefore be kind In doing that which by nature is not unwholesome Both for the sake of myself and other sentient beings I should always hold my mind fast, like an apparition, with no sense of self.
By thinking again and again that after a long time I have won the greatest leisure, Likewise, I should hold my mind As utterly unshakeable as the king of mountains.
If, mind, you are not made unhappy when this body is dragged and tossed about by vultures greedy for flesh, then why ate you so concerned about it now?
Holding this body as “mine”, Why, mind, do you guard it so?
Since you and it are separate, what use can it be to you? Why, confused mind, Do you not hold onto a clean, wooden form?
Just what is the point of guarding this putrid, dirt-filled machine? Fist of all, mentally separate The layers of skin And then with the scalpel of discrimination separate the flesh from the skeletal frame; And, having split open even the bones, Look right down into the marrow.
While examining this, ask yourself, “Where is its essence?”
If, even when searching with such effort You can apprehend no essence, Then why with so much attachment are you still guarding this body now?
What use is this body to you if its dirty insides ate unfit for you to eat, If its blood is not fit to drink And if its intestines are not fit to be sucked?
At second best, it is only fit to be guarded In order to feed the vultures and jackals.
this body of a human being Should only be employed Yet should you instead guard it , Then what will you be able to do When it is stolen by the unsympathetic Lord of Death And given to the dogs and birds?
If servants ate not given clothing and so forth When they ate unable to be employed, Then why do you exhaust yourself looking after the flesh alone When, even though cating for the body, it goes elsewhere?
Now having paid my body its wages, I shal!
engage it in making my life meaningful.
However, if my body is of no benefit, then I shall not give it anything, I should conceive of my body as a boat, a mere support for coming and going, and in order to benefit all others transform it into a wish-fulfilling body.
Now, while there is freedom to act, I should always present a smiling face And cease to frown and look angry; I should be a friend and counsel of the world.
I should desist from inconsiderately and noisily Moving around chairs and so forth, As well as from violently opening doots; I should always delight in humility.
The stork, the cat and the thief, By moving silently and carefully, Accomplish what they desire to do; A Bodhisattva, too, should always behave in this way.
With respect, I should gratefully accept Unsought-after words that are of benefit, And that wisely advise and admonish me.
At all times, I should be the pupil of everyone.
I should say, “Well said,” to all those.
Who speak well, And if T see someone doing good, I should praise them and be well pleased.
I should discreetly talk about the good qualities And repeat those recount.
If my own good qualities are spoken about, I should just know and be aware that I have them.
All deeds ate the source of a joy that would be rare even if it could be bought with money.
Therefore, I should be happy in finding this joy In the good things that are done by others.
I shall suffer no losses in this life And in future lives shall find great happiness.
But the fault will make me unhappy and miserable, And in future lives I shall find great suffering, When talking, I should speak from my heart on what is relevant, Making the meaning clear and the speech pleasing, I should not speak out of desire or hatred, But in gentle tones and in moderation.
When beholding someone with my eyes, Thinking, “I shall fully awaken Through depending upon this being” I should look at that person with love and an open heart.
Always being motivated by great aspiration, Or being motivated by the remedial forces, If I work in the fields of excellence, benefit and misery,’ great virtues will come about.
Endowed with wisdom and joy," I should undertake all that T do.
I not depend upon anyone else in any actons that IT undertake.
The petfections such as generosity Are progtessivély more exalted, But for a little I should not forsake a great : Principally, I should consider what will be of the most benefit for others.
When this is well understood, I should always strive for the welfare of others.
The Far-Seeing Merciful Ones have allowed To do some actions that were forbidden.
I should divide my food amongst those who have fallen to lower realms, Those without protection, and practitioners, And eat merely what is sufficient for myself.
Except for the three robes, I may give away all.
This body, which is being used for the sacred Dharma, Should not be harmed fot only slight benefit.
By behaving in this way, "The wishes of all beings will be quickly fulfilled.
Those who lack the pure intention of compassion Should not give their body away.
Instead, both in this and future lives, They should give it to the cause of fulfilling the great purpose.
The Dharma should not be explained to those who lack respect, To those who, like the sick, wear cloth around their heads, To those holding umbrellas, sticks or weapons, To those with covered heads,Nor to a woman unaccompanied by a man.
The vast and profound should not be taught to lesser beings, I should always pay equal respect To the Dharmas of the lesser and higher beings.
I should not communicate the Dharma of a lesser being To one who is a vessel for the vast Dharma.
I must not forsake the way of life, Nor mislead others by means of sutras or mantras.
When I spit or throw away the stick for my teeth, I should cover it up.
Also it is shameful to utinate and so forth In water or on land used by others.
When eating I should not fill my mouth, Eat noisily or with my mouth wide open.
I should not sit with my legs outstretched, Nor rub my hands together.
I should not sit alone in vehicles, upon beds, Nor in the same room with the women of others.
having observed or inquired about what is proper, I should not do anything that would be disliked by the people of the world.
I should not give directions with one finger, But instead indicate the way Respectfully with my right arm, With all my fingers fully outstretched.
Nor should I wildly wave my arms about, but should make my point with slight gestures and a snap of my fingers, Otherwise, I shall lose control.
Just as the Buddha lay down to pass away, So should I lie in the desired direction .
And first of all, with alertness, Make the firm decision to quickly tise again.
The limitless varieties of Bodhisattva conduct, I should certainly practice as much as Of this conduct that trains the mind.
Three times by day and three times by night I should recite The Sutra of the Three Heaps For by relying upon the Buddhas and the Awakening Mind My remaining downfalls will be purified.
Whatever I am doing in any situation, Whether for myself or for the benefit of others, I should strive to put into practice Whatever has been taught for that situation, There is no such thing as something That is not learned by a Bodhisattva, Thus if I am skilled in living in this way Nothing will be non-meritotious.
Whether directly or indirectly, I should not do anything that is not for the benefit of others.
Solely for the sake of sentient beings, I should dedicate everything towards awakening, never, even at the cost of my life, should I forsake a spititual friend who is wise in the meaning of the great vehicle, And who is a great Bodhisattva practitioner.
I should practice entrusting myself to my spiritual master In the manner taught in The Biography of Shrisambhava.”’ "
This and other advice spoken by the Buddha I can understand through reading the sutras.
I should read the sutras Because it is from them that the practices appeat.
To begin with, I should look at The Sutra of Akashagarba.
In addition I should definitely read The Compendinm of all Practices” again and again, Because what is to be constantly practiced is very well and extensively shown there.
Also I should sometimes look at the condensed Compendium of All Sutras.
And I should make an effort to study The wotks by the same two composed by the exalted Nagarjuna.
I should do whatever is not forbidden in those .
And when I see a practice there, I should impeccably put it into action, In order to guard the minds of worldly people.
The defining characteristic of guarding alertness, in brief, is only this; to examine again and again the condition of my body and mind.
Therefore, I shall put this way of life into actual practice, for what can be achieved by merely talking about it?
Will the sick receive benefit merely by reading the medical texts?
Whatever wholesome deeds, Such as venerating the Buddhas and generosity, that have been amassed over a thousand aeons will all be destroyed in one moment of anger.
There is no transgression like hatred, And no fortitude like patience.
Thus I should strive in various ways to meditate on patience.
My mind will not experience peace If it fosters painful thoughts of hatred.
I shall find no joy or happiness; Unable to sleep, I shall feel unsettled.
A master who has hatred Is in danger of being killed Even by those who, for their wealth and happiness, Depend upon the master’s kindness.
By it, friends and relatives are disheartened; Though drawn by my generosity, they will not trust me; In brief, there is nobody .
Who lives happily with anger.
Hence the enemy, anger, creates sufferings such as these, But whoever assiduously overcomes it finds happiness now and hereafter.
Having found its fuel of mental unhappiness in the prevention of what I wish for, And in doing what I do not want, Hatred increases and then destroys me.
Therefore, I should totally eradicate The fuel of this enemy; For this enemy has no other function Than that of causing me harm.
Whatever befalls me, I shall not disturb my mental joy; For having been made unhappy, I shall not accomplish what I wish, And my virtues will decline.
Why be unhappy about something if it can be remedied?

And what is the use of being unhappy about something If it cannot be remedied?
For myself and for my friends I want no suffering, no disrespect, No harsh words and nothing unpleasant; But for my enemies, it is the opposite.
The causes of happiness sometimes occurs.
But the causes for suffering are frequent.
Without suffering, there is no renunciation.
Therefore, mind, you should stand firm.
If some ascetics and the people of Karnapa Endute the pain of cuts and burns for no reason, Then for the sake of liberation Why have I no courage?There is nothing whatsoever that is not made easier through acquaintance.
So through becoming acquainted with small harms, I should learn to patiently accept greater harms.
Who has not seen this to be so, with trifling sufferings Such as the bites of snakes and insects, feelings of hunger and thirst, And with such minor things as rashes?
I should not be impatient With heat and cold, wind and rain, sickness, bondage and beatings; For if I am, the harm they cause me will increase.
Some, when they see their own blood, Become especially brave and steady, But some, when they see the blood of others, Faint and fall unconscious.
These come from the mind being either steady or timid.
Therefore, I should disregard harms caused to ine, And not be affected by suffering, Even when the wise ate suffering Their minds remain very lucid and undefiled; Fort when war is being waged against the disturbing conceptions, Much harm is caused at the time of battle.
The victorious wartiors are those who, having disregarded all suffering, vanquish the foes of hatred and so forth; slay only corpses.
Furthermore, suffering has good qualities: “Through being disheartened with it, arrogance is dispelled, Compassion arises for those in cyclic existence, : Negativity is shunned and joy is found in virtue.
As I do not become angty With great sources of suffering such as jaundice, Then why be angry with animate creatures? "
They, too, are provoked by conditions.
Although they are not wished for, These sicknesses arise; And likewise, although they are not wished for, These disturbing conceptions forcibly arise.
Without thinking, “I shall be angry,” People become angry with no resistance, and without thinking, “I shall produce myself,” Likewise anger itself is produced, all mistakes that occur And all the various kinds of wrongdoing arise through the force of conditions; They do not govern themselves.
These conditions that assemble together Have no intention to produce anything, And neither does their product Have the intention to be produced.
That which is asserted as Primal Substance And that which is imputed as a Self,” do not arise after having purposefully thought, “I shall arise .”If they are unproduced and non-existent, Then whatever wish they have to produce Since would permanently apprehend its object, It follows that it would never cease to do so.
Furthermore, if the Self were permanent, It would clearly be devoid of action, like space.
So even if it met with other conditions, How could its unchanging be affected?
Even if when acted upon : it remains as before, then what could actions do to it?
Thus if I say that this acts upon , how could the two ever be related?
Hence everything is governed by other factors are governed by, and in this way nothing governs itself.
Having understood this, I should not become angry with phenomena, which are like apparitionsthen who is there to restrain what?
Surely restraint would be inappropriate It would not be inapproptiate, because I must That in dependence upon restraining , the stream of suffering is severed.
So when one sees an enemy or even a friend Committing an improper action, By thinking that such things arise from conditions I shall remain in a happy frame of mind.
If things were brought into being by choice, then since no one wishes to suffer, suffering would not occur to any embodied creature.
Through not being careful, : People even harm themselves with thorns and other things, And for the sake of obtaining women and the like, They become obsessed and deptive themselves of food.
And there are some who injure themselves Through the unmeritorious deeds Of hanging themselves, leaping from cliffs, Eating poison and unhealthy food.
If, when under the influence-of disturbing conceptions, People will even kill their treasured selves, How can they be expected not to cause harm To the bodies of other living beings?
Even if I cannot develop compassion for all such people Who, through the arisal of disturbing conceptions, Set out to try and kill me and so forth, The last thing I should do is to become angry with them.
Even if it were the nature of the childish To cause harm to other beings, Tt would still be incorrect to be angry with them, For this would be like begrudging fire for having the nature to burn.
And even if the fault were temporary In they who are by nature reliable, It would still be incorrect to be angry, For this would be like begrudging space for allowing smoke to atiseinit If I become angry with the wielder, Although I'am actually harmed by the stick, : Then since the perpetrator, too, is secondary, being in turn incited by hatred, I should be angry with the hatred instead.
Previously, I must have caused similar harm to other sentient beings.
Therefore, it is tight for this harm to be returned To me, who caused injury to others, Both the weapon and my body are the causes of my suffering.
Since the other gave rise to the weapon, and I to the body, with whom should I be angry?
If, in blind attachment, I cling to this suffering abscess of a human form Which cannot bear to be touched, With whom should I be angry when it is hurt?
It is the fault of the childish that they are hurt, For although they do not wish to suffer, They are greatly attached to its causes.
So why should they be angry with others?
Having been instigated by my own actions, Those who cause me harm come into being, If by these they should fall into hell, Surely isn’t it I who am destroying them?
In depending upon them, I purify many transgressions by patiently accepting the harms that they cause.
But in depending upon me, they will fall into hellish pain for a very long time.
So since T am causing harm to them And they are benefitting me, Why, unruly mind, do you become angry In such a mistaken manner?
If my mind has the noble quality, I shall not go to hell.
Although I am protecting myself, How will it be so for them?
Nevertheless, should I return the harm, It will not protect them either.
By doing so my conduct will deteriorate, And hence this fortitude will be destroyed.
Since my mind is not physical in no way can anyone destroy it, But through its being greatly attached to my body it is caused harm by suffering since disrespect, harsh speech and unpleasant words do not cause any harm to my body, why, mind, do you become so angry?
Because others will dislike me but since it will not devour me, either in this or in another life, why do I not want this?
Because it will hinder my wordly gain even if I do not want this, I shall have to leave my worldly gains behind and my wrongdoing alone will remain unmoved.
Thus it is better that I die today Than live a long but wicked life; for even if people like me should live a long time, there will always be the suffering of death.
Suppose someone should awaken from a dream in which they expetienced one hundred years of happiness, and suppose another should awaken from a dream In which they experienced just one moment of happiness; For both of these people who have awoken, That happiness will never return.
Similarly, whether my life has been long or short, at the time of death it will be finished like this.
Although I may live happily for a long time through obtaining a great deal of material wealth, I shall go forth empty-handed and destitute Just like having been robbed by a thief.
-Surely matetial wealth will enable me to live, And then I shall be able to consume transgressions and do good But if I am angty on account of it : Will not my merit be consumed and transgressions increase?
And what use will be the life of one who only commits wrongdoing, if, for the sake of material gain, one causes life to degenerate?
Surely I should be angry with those Who say unpleasant things that weaken other beings’ In the same way, why am I not angry With people who say unpleasant things about others?
If I can patiently accept this lack of confidence Because it is related to someone else, Then why am I not patient with unpleasant words, Since they are related to the atising of disturbing conceptions?
Should others talk badly of or even destroy Holy images, reliquaries and the sacred Dharma, It is improper for me to resent it, For the Buddhas can never be injured.
I should prevent anger arising towards those Who injure my: spititual masters, relatives and friends.
Instead I should see, as in the manner shown before, that such things arise from conditions.
Since embodied creatures are injured By both animate beings and inanimate objects, Why only bear malice to the animate?
It follows that I should patiently accept all harm.
Should one person ignorantly do wrong, And another ignorantly become angry, Who would be at fault?
And who would be without fault?
Why did I previously commit those actions, because of which, others now cause me harm?
Since everything is related to my actions, Why should I bear malice towards these ?
When I have seen this to be so, I should strive for what is meritorious certainly bring about Loving thoughts between all, For example, when a fire in one house Has moved into another house, It is right to get rid of straw and such things That will cause the fire to spread.
Likewise, when the fire of hatred spreads To whatever my mind is attached to, I should immediately get rid of it For fear of my metit being burned.
Why is a person condemned to death not fortunate If they are released after having a hand cut off?
Why am I who is experiencing human misery not fortunate if by that I am spared from hell?
If I am unable to endure even the mere sufferings of the present, Then why do I not restrain myself from being angry, Which will be the source of hellish misery?
For the sake of satisfying my desires, I have suffered numerous burnings in hell; But by those actions, I neither fulfilled the purpose Of myself not others.
Yet now, since great meaning will accrue from harm which is not even of that, I should indeed be solely joyful towards such suffering that dispels the harms of all, Should someone else find joyous happiness in praising as an excellent person, Why, mind, do you not praise them, too, And likewise make yourself happy?That joyous happiness of yours would be a source of joy, not something prohibited, A precept given by the Excellent Ones And a supreme for assembling others.
It is said that others are made happy through in this way.
If in this way, you do not want this happiness, then, you should cease giving wages and the like.
However, you would be adversely affected both in this and future lives.
When people describe my own good qualities I want others to be happy to, But when they describe the good qualities of others I do not wish to be happy myself.
Having generated the Awakening Mind ‘Through wishing all beings to be happy, Why should I become angry If they find some happiness themselves?
If I wish for all sentient beings to become Buddhas worshipped throughout the three realms, Then why am I tormented When I see them receiving merely mundane respect?
If a relative for whom I am caring, and to whom I must give many things, should be able to find their own livelihood, wouldn't I be happy, rather than angry?
If I do not wish for beings to have even this, How can I wish for them to awaken?
And where is there an Awakening Mind In one who becomes angry when others receive things?
What does it matter if is given something or not?
So why, by becoming angry, do I throw away my merits, The faith and my good qualities?
Tell me, why am I not angry for not having the causes for gain?
Let alone not having any remorse About the wrongs that you committed, Why do you wish to compete with others Who have committed meritorious deeds?
Even if your enemy is made unhappy, “What is there for you to be joyful about?
Your merely wishing Did not cause them to be injured.
And even if the enemy does suffer as you had wished, What is there for you to be joyful about?
If you say, “For I shall be satisfied,” How could there be anything more wretched than that?
This hook cast by the fishermen of disturbing: conceptions is unbearably sharp.
Having been caught on it; it is certain that I shall be cooked In cauldrons by the guardians of hell.
The honout of praise and fame will not turn into merit or life; It will give me neither strength nor freedom from sickness, And will not provide any physical happiness.
If I were aware of what held meaning for me, What value would I find in these things?
If all I want is mental happiness, I should devote myself to gambling, drinking and so forth.
If, for the sake of fame, I give away my wealth or get myself killed, What can the mere words do then?
Once I have died, to whom will they give pleasure?
When their sandcastles collapse, children howl in despair; Likewise, when my praise and reputation decline, my mind becomes like a little child.
Since short-lived sounds are inanimate, they cannot possibly think of praising me.
But as it makes happy, reputation is a source of pleasure whether this praise is directed at myself or someone else How shall I be benefitted by the joy ?
Since that joy and happiness is theirs alone, I shall not obtain even a part of it.
If I do find happiness in their happiness, then surely I should feel the same way towards all?
And if this were so, then why am I unhappy when others find pleasure in that which brings them joy? ‘
Therefore the happiness that arises From thinking, “I am being praised,” is invalid.
It is only the behaviour of a child.
Praise and so forth distract me, and also undermine my disillusion ; I start to envy those who have good qualities, And all the very best is destroyed.
Therefore, are not those who are closely involved in destroying my praise and the like, Also involved in protecting me from falling into the unfortunate realms?
I, who am striving for freedom, Do not need to be bound by material gain and honour.
So why should I be angry With those who free me from this bondage?
But what if someone should obstruct-my gaining merit?
With them, too, it is incotrect to be angry, For since thete is no fortitude similar to patience, Surely I should put it into practice.
If ‘due to my own failings, I m not patient with this , Then it is only I who am preventing myself From practicing this cause for gaining merit.
If without it, something does not occu, And if with it, it does comes to be, : Then since this would be the cause of how can I say that prevents it?
A beggar is not an obstacle to generosity When I am giving something away, And I cannot say that those who give ordination ate an obstacle to becoming ordained.
There are indeed many beggars in this world, but scarce are those who inflict harm; For if I have not injured others, Few beings will cause me harm.
Therefore, just like treasure appeating in my house without any effort on my part to obtain it, I should be happy to have enemies for they assist me in my conduct of awakening, because I am able to practice with them, they are worthy of being given the'very first fruits of my patience, For in this way, they ate the cause of it.
But why should my enemy be venerated, who has no intention for me to practice patience?
Then why venerate the sacred Dharma?
but is a fit cause for practice.
Thus, since patient acceptance is produced In dependence upon a very hateful mind, : that person should be worthy of veneration just like the sacred Dharma, because they ate a cause of patience.
Therefore the Mighty One has said that the field of sentient beings is a Buddhafield,” For many who have pleased them Have thereby reached petfection.
A Buddha's qualities are gained from the sentient beings and the Conquerors alike, So why do I not respect them in the same way as I respect the conquerors?
they are not similar in the quality of their intentions But only in the fruits ; So it is in this respect that they have excellent qualities and are therefore equal.
Whatever venerating one with a loving mind is due to the eminence of sentient beings.
And in the same way, the merit of having faith in Buddha is due to the eminence of Buddha.
Therefore, they are asserted to be equal in the share they have in establishing Buddha-qualities.
Yet none of them are equal With the Buddhas who are boundless Oceans of Excellence.
Even if the three realms were offered, It would be insufficient in paying veneration To those few beings in whom a mere share of the good qualides Of the Unique Assemblage of Excellence appear.
Thus since sentient beings have a share in giving rise to the supreme Buddha-qualities, surely it is correct to venerate them As they are similar in merely this respect?
Furthermore, what way is there to repay who grant immeasurable benefit And who befriend the world without pretension, other than by pleasing sentient beings?
Therefore, since benefitting these beings will repay Those who give their bodies and enter the deepest hell for their sake, I shall behave impeccably in all Even if they cause me a great deal of harm.
When for their sake, those who are my Lords Have no regard even for their own bodies, Then why am I the fool so full of self-importance?
Why do I not act like a setvant towards them?
Because of their happiness, the Conquerors are delighted.
However, if they are harmed are displeased.
Hence by pleasing them I shall delight the Conquerors, and by harming them I shall hurt the Conquerors.
Just as desirable sense-objects would give my mind no pleasure If my body was ablaze with fire, Likewise, when living creatures are in pain There is no way for the Compassionate Ones to be pleased.
Therefore, as I have caused harm to living beings, today I openly declare all my unwholesome acts that have brought displeasure to the compassionate ones.
Please bear with me, O Lords, for this displeasure I have caused you.
From now on, in order to delight the Tathagatas I shall serve the universe and definitely cease .
Although many beings may kick and stamp upon my head, Even at the risk of dying, may I delight the Protectors of the World.
There is no doubt that those with the nature of compassion regard all these beings as themselves.
Furthermore, those who see as the nature of sentient beings also see the Buddhas themselves; Why then do I not respect delights the Tathagatas And perfectly accomplishes my own purpose as well.
In addition, it dispels the pain and misery of the universe, Therefore I should always practice it.
For example, should some of the king’s men cause harm to many people, farsighted ones would not return the harm even if they were able .
For they see that are not alone But are supported by the might of the king, Likewise, I should not underestimate Weak beings who cause me a little harm; For they are supported by the guardians of hell And by all the Compassionate Ones.
So, like the subjects of that fiery king, I should please all sentient beings.
Even if such a king were to become angry, Could he cause the pain-of hell, Which is the fruit I would have to experience By displeasing sentient beings?
And even if such a king were to be kind, He could not possibly grant me Buddhahood, Which is the fruit I would obtain By pleasing sentient beings.
Why do I not see that my future attainment of Buddhahood, as well as glory, renown and happiness in this very life, all come from pleasing sentient beings?
While in cyclic existence, patience causes Beauty, health and renown.
Because of these, I shall live for a very long time And win the extensive pleasure of the universal Chakra Kings.
Having patience, I should develop enthusiasm; for awakening will dwell only in those who exert themselves, just as there is no movement without wind, so merit does not occur without enthusiasm,What is enthusiasm?
It is finding joy in what is wholesome.
Its opposing factors are explained as laziness, attraction to what is harmful and despising oneself out of despondency.
Because of attachment to the pleasurable taste of idleness, Because of craving for sleep And because of having no disillusion with the misery of cyclic existence, Laziness grows very strong, Enmeshed in the snare of disturbing conceptions, I have entered the snate of birth.
Why am I still not awate That I live in the mouth of the Lord of Death?Do I not see That he is systematically slaughtering my species?
Whoever remains soundly asleep like a buffalo with a butcher.
When having blocked off every route, .
The Lord of Death is looking , How can I enjoy eating?
And likewise, how can I enjoy sleep?
For as long as death is actually approaching Then I shall accumulate merits; Even if I then put a stop to laziness, What will be the use?
That is not the time!
When this has not been done, when this is being done And when this is only half finished, Suddenly the Lotd of Death will come.
And the thought will occur, “Oh no, I am done for! ”
Their faces flowing with tears And theit eyes red and swollen with sorrow, My relatives will finally lose hope, And I shall behold the vision of the messengers of death.
Tormented by the memory of my wrongdoing, And hearing the sounds of hell, In terror, I shall clothe my body in excrement.
What virtue can I do in such a delirious state?
If even in this life I shall be gripped with fear Like that of a live fish being rolled, Why even mention the unbearable agonies of hell That will result from my unwholesome deeds?
How can I remain at ease like this, When I have committed the actions In my delicate infant's body encountering boiling acids In the hell of tremendous heat?
Much harm befalls those with little forbearance and those who want results without making any effort.
While clasped by death, they shall cry like the gods “Oh no, I am overcome by misery! ”
Relying upon the boat of a human , Free yourself from the great river of pain!
As it is hard to find this boat again, This is no time for sleep, you fool.
Having rejected the supreme joy of the sacred Dharma, which is a boundless source of delight, why am I distracted by the causes for pain?
Why do I enjoy frivolous amusements and the like?
Without indulging in despondency, I should gather the supports And earnestly take control of myself, the equality between self and others, I should practice exchanging self for others, I should never indulge in despondency by entertaining such thoughts as, “How shall I ever awaken?”
For the Tathagatas who speak what is true Have uttered this truth: “If they develop the strength of their exertion, Even those who are flies, mosquitoes, bees and insects Will'win the unsutrpassable awakening, Which is so hard to find.”
so, if I do not forsake the Bodhisattvas’ way of life.
Why should someone like myself, who has been botn in the human race, Not attain Awakening, since I am able to recognize What is beneficial and what is of harm?
Nevertheless, it frightens me to think that I may have to give away my arms and legs Without discriminating between what is heavy and what is light, I am reduced to fear through confusion.
For over countless myriads of aeons I have been cut, stabbed, burned, and flayed alive innumerable times, but I have not awakened.
Yet the suffering involved in my awakening will have a limit; It is like the suffering of having an incision made In order to remove and destroy greater pain.
Even doctors eliminate illness with unpleasant medical treatments, So in order to overcome manifold sufferings I should be able to put up with some discomfort.
Yet the Supreme Physician does not employ Common medical treatments such as these, with an extremely gentle technique, He remedies all the greatest ills.
At the beginning, the guide of the world encourages the giving of such things as food.
Later, when accustomed to this, one may progressively start to give away even one’s flesh.
At such a time when my mind is developed To the point of regarding my body like food, ‘Then what hardship would there be When it came to giving away my flesh?
Having forsaken all transgression, there would be no suffering, And due to wisdom, there would be no lack of joy; But now my mind is afflicted by mistaken conceptions And my body is caused harm by unwholesome deeds.
As their bodies are happy due to their merits, and their minds are happy due to their wisdom, even if they remained in cyclic existence for the sake of others, why would the compassionate ones ever be upset?
Due to the strength of the Awakening Mind, The Bodhisattvas consume their previous transgressions And hatvests oceans of merit: Hence they are said to excel the Shravakas.
So, having mounted the horse of an Awakening Mind That dispels all discouragement and weariness, Who, when they know of this mind that proceeds from joy to joy, Would ever lapse into despondency?
The supports when wotking for the sake of living beings are aspiration,” steadfastness, joy and rest.
Aspiration is developed through fear of misery and by contemplating the benefits of itself.
Thus in order to increase my enthusiasm I should strive to abandon its opposing forces, to aspiration, self-confidence,” joy and rest, to practice in earnest and to become strong in self-control.
I shall have to overcome the boundless faults of myself and others, And each of these faults an ocean of acons is exhausted.
Yet if within myself I do not perceive even a fraction of the petseverance to exhaust these faults, then why do I not have a heart attack?
For now I have become an abode for infinite misery.
Likewise, I shall have to realize many excellent qualities for myself and others, And each of these qualities I may have to acquaint myself with its cause until an ocean of acons is exhausted.
However, I have never developed acquaintance with even a fraction of these excellences.
How strange it is to squander This birth I have found by some coincidence, I have not made offerings to the Lotd Buddhas, I have not given the pleasure of great festivals, I have not performed actions for the teachings, T have not fulfilled the wishes of the poor, I have not granted fearlessness to the frightened and I have not given happiness to the weak.
All T have given rise to is The agonies in the mother’s womb, and to suffering, Both now and in previous lives, Such deprivation has atisen Because of my lack of aspiring for the Dharma.
Who would ever reject this aspiring for Dharma?
The Mighty One himself has said That aspiration is the root of every facet of virtue; Its root is constant acquaintance With the ripening-effects .
pain, mental unhappiness, all the various kinds of fear, - As well as separation from what is desired all arise from an unwholesome way of life.
by committing wholesome actions, Which are in the mind, Wherever I go I shall be presented with Tokens of the fruit of that merit.
Yet by committing negative , Although I may wish for happiness, Wherever I go I shall be completely overcome By weapons of pain by my wrorigful life.
As a result of virtue, I shall dwell in the spacious, fragrant and cool heart of a lotus flower, My radiance will be nourished by the food of the Conquerors sweet speech, My glotious form will spting from a lotus unfolded by the Mighty Ones light, And, as a Bodhisattva, I shall abide in the presence of the Conquerors.
However, as a result of non-virtue, my skin will be tipped off by the henchmen of Yama. In this feeble state, liquid copper melted by tremendous heat will be poured into my body. Pierced by flaming swords and daggers, my flesh will be cut into a hundred pieces, And I shall tumble upon the fiercely blazing iron ground.
Therefore, I should aspire for virtue, and with great respect acquaint myself with it.
Having undertaken the wholesome iri the manner of Vajradhvaja,” I should then proceed to acquaint myself with self-confidence.
First of all, I should examine well what is to be done, "To see whether I can pursue it or cannot undertake it.
it is best to leave it, But once I have started I must not withdraw.
then this habit will continue in other lives And wrongdoing and misery will increase; Also, other actions done at the time of its fruition Will be weak and will not be accomplished.

Self-confidence should be applied to actions, The of disturbing conceptions and my ability.
Thinking, “I alone shall do it,” Is the self-confidence of action.
Powerless, their minds disturbed, People in this wotld are unable to benefit themselves.
Therefore, I shall do it , Since unlike me these beings are incapable.
if others are doing inferior tasks, Why should I sit here ?
I do not do those tasks because of self-importance; It would be best for me to have no such pride.
When crows encounter a dying snake, ‘They will act as though they were eagles.
if is weak, I shall be injured by the slightest downfall.
How can those who, out of faint-heartedness,have given up trying to find liberation because of this deficiency?
Yet even the greatest will find it hard to overcome. Therefore, with a steady mind, I shall overcome all falls, For if I am defeated by a fall, my wish to vanquish the three realms will become a joke.
I will conquer everything "And nothing at all shall conquer me!
I, a child of the Lion-like Conqueror, should remain self-confident in this way.
Whoever has self-importance is destroyed by it, is disturbed and has no self-confidence.
For those with self-confidence do not succumb to the power of the enemy, Whereas the former are under the sway of the enemy of self importance.
Inflated by the disturbing conception of my self-importance, I shall be led by it to the lower realms.
It destroys the joyous festival of being human.
I shall become a slave, eating the food of others, Stupid, ugly, feeble and everywhere disrespected.
Tough people bloated by conceit are also counted among the self-important; Tell me, what is more pathetic than this?
Whoever seizes self-confidence in order to conquer the enemy of self-importance, They ate the self-confident ones, the victorious heroes, And in addition, whoever definitely conquers the spread of this enemy, self-importance, Completely the fruit of a conqueror, fulfilling the wishes of the world.
If I find myself amidst a crowd of disturbing conceptions, I shall endure them in a thousand ways; Like a lion among foxes, I will not be affected by this disturbing host.
Just as men will guard their eyes When great danger and turmoil occur, likewise, I shall never be swayed by the distutbances within my mind, Even at times of great strife.
It would be better for me to be burned, to have my head cut off and to be killed, rather then ever bowing down to those ever-present disturbing conceptions.
Just like those who yearn for the fruits of plas, ate attracted To whatever task they may do; They never have enough, it only brings them joy.
Although people work in order to be happy, It is uncertain whether or not they will find it; But how can those whose work itself is joy Find happiness unless they do it?
If I feel that I never have enough sensual objects, Which are like honey smeared upon a razor’s edge, Then why should I ever feel that I have enough merit which ripens in happiness and peace?
Thus in order to complete this task, I shall venture into it Just as an elephant tormented by the mid-day sun Plunges into a lake.
When my strength declines, I should leave whatever I am doing In order to be able to continue with it later.
Having done something well, I should put it aside With the wish what will follow.
Just as an old wartior approaches The swords of an enemy upon the battlefront, So shall T avoid the weapons of the disturbing conceptions And skilfully bind this enemy.
If someone dropped a sword duting a battle, They would immediately pick it up out of fear.
Likewise, if I lose the weapon of mindfulness, I should quickly retrieve it, being afraid of hell.
Just as poison spreads throughout the body in dependence upon the blood, Likewise, if finds an opportunity, Unwholesomeness will permeate my mind.
Those who practice should be as attentive As a frightened man carrying a jar full of mustard oil, Who is being threatened by someone with a sword, that he will be killed if he spills just one drop.
Just as I'would swiftly stand up If a snake came into my lap, Likewise, if any sleep or laziness occurs, I shall quickly turn it back.
Each time something unwholesome occurs I should criticize myself, and then contemplate for a long time that I shall never let this happen again. “
Likewise in all these situations I shall acquaint myself with mindfulness.”
With this as a cause, I shall aspire To meet or accomplish the tasks .
In otder to have strength for everything, I should recall before undertaking any action The advice in conscientiousness, And then joyfully rise .
Just as the wind blowing back and forth controls a piece of cotton, so shall I be controlled by joy, and in this way accomplish everything, having developed enthusiasm in this way, I should place my mind in concentration; for the person whose mind is distracted dwells between the fangs of disturbing conceptions.
However, through solitude of body and mind no distractions will occur; therefore, I should forsake the worldly life, And completely discard distorted conceptions.
Worldly life is not forsaken because of attachment , and due to craving for material gain and the like; therefore I should entirely forsake these things, for this is the way in which the wise behave, having understood that disturbing conceptions are completely overcome by superior insight endowed with calm abiding, first of all, I should search for calm abiding.
This is achieved through the genuine joy of those unattached to worldly life.
Because of the obsession one transient being Has for other transient beings, They will not see their beloved ones again For many thousands of lives.
Not seeing them, I am unhappy and my mind cannot be settled in equipoise; Even if I see them, there is no satisfaction And, as before, I am tormented by craving.
Through being attached to living beings, I am completely obscured from the perfect reality, ‘My disillusionment petishes and, in the end, I am tortured by sorrow.
By thinking only of them, this life will pass without any meaning, impermanent friends and relatives will even destroy the Dharma permanent If I behave in the same way as the childish, I shall certainly proceed to lower realms, And if I am led there by those unequal, What is the use of entrusting myself to the childish?
One moment they ate friends, and in the next instant they become enemies.
Since they become angry even in joyful situations, it is difficult to please ordinary people.
They ate angry when something of benefit is said, And they also turn me away from what is beneficial.
If do not listen to what they say, They become angry and hence proceed to lower realms.
They are envious of superiors, competitive with equals, Arrogant towards inferiors, conceited when praised, And if anything unpleasant is said, they become angry.
Never is any benefit derived from the childish.
Through associating with the childish, There will certainly ensue unwholesomeness, Such as praising myself, belittling others And discussing the joys of cyclic existence.
Devoting myself to others in this way Will bring about nothing but misfortune, because they will not benefit me, and I shall not benefit them.
I should flee far away from childish people.
When they are encountered, though, I should please them by being happy.
I should behave well merely out of courtesy, But not become greatly familiar, In the same way as a bee takes honey from a flower, I should take merely for the practice of Dharma, But remain unfamiliar, As though I had never seen them before. “
I have much material wealth as well as honor, And many people like me.”
Nurturing self-importance in this way I shall be made terrified after death.
So, you thoroughly confused mind, By the piling up of whatever objects You are attached to, Misery a thousandfold will ensue.
Hence the wise should not be attached, feat is born from attachment.
With a firm mind understand well that it is the nature of these things to be discarded!
Although I may have much material wealth, be famous and well-spoken of, whatever fame and renown I have amassed has no power to accompany me.
If there is someone who despises me, what pleasure can I have in being praised? And if there is another who praises me, What displeasure can I have in being despised?
If even the Conqueror was unable to please ‘The various inclinations of different beings, Then what need to mention a malicious person such as I?
Therefore, I should give up the intention the wotldly.
They scorn those who have no material gain And say bad things about those who do; how can they, who ate by nature so hard to get along with, ever derive any pleasure?
It has been said by the Tathagatas That one should not befriend the childish Beciuse, unless they get theit own way, These children ate never happy.
When shall I come to dwell in forests Amongst the deer, the birds and the trees, That say nothing unpleasant, And are delightful to associate with?
When dwelling in caves, in empty shrines and at the feet of trees, never look back cultivate detachment.
When shall I come to dwell".
When shall I come to live without fear, Having just a begging bowl and a few odd things, Wearing clothes not wanted by anyone, And not even having to hide this body?
Having departed to the cemeteries, When shall I come to understand That this body of mine and the skeletons of others Are equal in being subject to decay?
Then, because of its odor, not even the foxes will come close to this body of mine; For this is what will become of it.
Although this body arose as one thing, the bones and flesh with which it was created will break up and separate.
How much mote so will friends and others?
At birth I was botn alone, And at death, too, I shall die alone; As this pain cannot be shared by others, What use ate obstacle-making friends?
In the same way as travellers on a highway and reach , Likewise, those travelling on the path of conditioned existence one birth and reach .
Until the time comes for this body "To be supported by four pall-bearers While the wotldly stricken with grief, Until then, I shall retite to the forest.
Befriending no one and begrudging no one, 
My body will dwell alone in solitude.
If I am already counted as a dead man, when I die there will be no mourners.
And as there will be no one around To disturb me with their mourning, Thus there will be no one to distract me From my recollection of the Buddha.
Therefore, I shall dwell alone, Happy and contented with few difficulties, In very joyful and beautiful forests, Pacifying all distractions.
Having given up all other intentions, being motivated by only one thought, I shall strive to setde my mind in equipoise by means of calm: And to subdue it.
Both in this wotld and the next, Desires give rise to great misfortune: In this life killing, bondage and flaying, And in the next, the existence of the hells.
For the sake of , many requests Are first of all made through go-betweens, All forms of transgression and even nototiety Are not avoided fort their sake.
I engage in fearful deeds for them, And will even consume my wealth.
But these , Which I greatly enjoy in the sexual embrace, Are nothing other than skeletons, They are not autonomous and are identityless.
Rather than being so desirous and completely obsessed, Why do I not go to the state beyond sorrow ?
In the first place, I made efforts to lift, and when it was raised she bashfully looked down.
Previously, whether anyone looked or not, her face was covered with a cloth.
Yet now, why do I run away upon directly beholding this face, which disturbs the mind as it is being revealed to me by the vultures?
I completely protected When others cast their eyes upon it.
Why, miser, do you not protect it now, While it is being devoured by these birds?
Since vultures and others are eating This pile of meat that I behold, Why did I offer lower garlands; sandalwood and ornaments To that which is now the food of others?
If I am frightened by the skeletons I see, Even though they do not move, Why am I not frightened by walking corpses : Which are moved around by a few ?
Although I am attached to it when it is covered , Why do I not desire it when it is uncovered?
Since I have no need for it then, Why copulate with it when it is covered?
Since both excrement and saliva arise solely from food, why do I dislike excrement, And find joy in saliva?
Cotton, too, is soft to the touch, but while I find no delight in a pillow, I think that does not emit a putrid odot.
Lustful One, you are confused as to what is unclean!
Thinking that they cannot sleep with this cotton, although it is soft to the touch,:confused, negative and lustful cope : become angry towards it.
If I am not attached to what is unclean, then why do I copulate with the lowet parts of others’ bodies, which are merely cages of bones tied together with muscles, plastered over with the mud of flesh?
I myself contain many unclean things Which I constantly have to experience; So why; because of an obsession for uncleanliness; do I desite other bags of filth?
But it is the flesh that I enjoy if this is what I wish to touch and behold, why do I not desire it in its natural state, devoid of any mind? Furthermore, any mind that I may desire Is unable to be touched or beheld, And whatever I am able to touch will not be mental; so why indulge in this meaningless copulation?
It is not so strange that I do not understand the bodies of others to be of an-unclean nature, But it is indeed strange that I do not understand My very own body to be by nature unclean.
Having forsaken the young lotus flower unfolded by beams of sunlight free from cloud, Why, with a mind craving for what is unclean, Do I revel in a cage of filth?
Since I do not wish to touch a place that is smeared with excrement, Then why do I wish to touch the body From which that arose?
If I am not attached to what is unclean, why do I copulate with the lower parts of others” bodies, which arise from the unclean field And are produced by the seeds within it?
I have no wish for a small, dirty maggot Which has come from a pile of filth, So why do I desire this body, which by nature is grossly unclean, For jt too was produced by filth?
Not only do I not disparage The uncleanliness of my own body, But, because of an obsession for what is unclean, I desire other bags of filth as well.
Even attractive things such as savory foods, Cooked rice and vegetables, Make the ground dirty and unclean, should they be spat out after being in the mouth.
Although such uncleanliness is obvious, If I still have doubts I should go to the cemeteries And look at the unclean bodies that have been thrown away there.
Having realized that, when their skin is rent open, they give tise to a great deal of fear, how will such things as these ever again give rise to joy?
The scents with which someone’s body is anointed Are sandalwood and the like, but not that of the othet’s body.
So why am I attached to others’ Because of scents that ate other ?
Since the body has a naturally foul odor, Iso’t it good to be unattached to it?
Why do those who crave for the meaningless things of the world Anoint this body with pleasant scents?
And furthermore, if it is the pleasant scent of sandalwood, How can it come from the body?
So why am I attached to others’ because of scents that are other?
Since the naked body, in its natural state, is very frightening due to its long hair and nails, its yellowish foul-smelling teeth And its being coated with the odor of dirt, why do I make such an effort to polish it, Like a weapon that will cause me harm?
Hence this entire world is disturbed with insanity, Due to the exertions of those who are confused about themselves.
When my mind rises , : Through having beheld nothing but skeletons in the ccometey Will there be any joy in graveyard cities Which are filled with moving skeletons?
Furthermore, these unclean Are not found without paying a price.
In order to obtain them, I exhaust myself And will be injured in the hells.
As a child, I am unable to increase my wealth, And as a youth, what.can I do ? : “
At the end of my life, when I have the wealth, Being an.
old man, what good will sex be then?
Some malicious and lustful people wear themselves out by working all day and, when they return home , their exhausted bodies lic prostrate like corpses: some have the suffering of being disturbed with travel And having to go a long way from home, although they long for their spouses, they do not see them for years at a time, and some who wish for benefit due to confusion, even sell themselves for the sake of: but not attaining what they wish, they are aimlessly driven.
by the winds of others’ actions.
Some sell their own bodies And, without any powet, are employed by othets.
Even when their wives give birth, Their children fall at the feet of trees and in lonely places.
Some fools who ate deceived by desire and, Wishing for a livelihood, think, “I shall earn my living;” Then, although afraid of losing ¢ their lives, ss they gO to war: Others become slaves for the sake of profit. :
Some lustful people even cut their bodies, others impale themselves on the points of sticks, some stab themselves with daggers, and others burn themselves—such things as these are quite appatent.
Due to the torment involved in collecting it, protecting and finally losing it, I should realize wealth to be fraught with infinite problems.
Those who are distracted by their attachment to it Have no opportunity to gain freedom from the misery of conditioned existence.
In the same way as animals drawing catriages Are only able to eat a few mouthfuls of grass, Likewise, desirous people Have many disadvantages such as these, and little , And since even animals can obtain this , Those who are pained by their actions Waste these leisutes and endowments, so difficult to find, For the sake of something trivial that is not so scarce.
The objects of desire will certainly perish, And then I shall fall into hellish states.
However, Buddhahood itself is attained with just one millionth of the difficulty involved in continually exhausting myself for the sake of what is not very great.
The desirous experience greater misery than the awakening way of life — But there is no Awakening, when one has contemplated the miseries of hell, there is nothing comparable To the harm cansed to desirous beings, Even by weapons, poison, fire, ravines and foes.
Having in this way developed disillusionment with desire, I should generate joy for solitude.
The fortunate ones stroll in peaceful forests, Devoid of disputes and distutbing conceptions.
in joyful houses of vast flat stones, Cooled by the sandal-scented moonlight, Fanned by the peaceful, silent forest breeze, Thinking of what is of benefit for others.
They dwell for as long as they wish in empty houses, at the feet of trees and in caves.
Having abandoned the pain of clinging to and guarding, They abide independent, free of care, Living as they choose, desireless, Having no ties with anyone Even the powerful have difficulty finding A life as happy and content as this.
Having in such ways as these thought about the excellences of solitude, I should completely pacify distorted conceptions And meditate on the Awakening Mind.
Fist of all, I should make an effort to meditate upon the equality between self and others.
I should protect all beings as I do myself Because we are all equal in pleasure and pain.
Although there are many different parts and aspects such as the hand, as a body that is to be protected, they are one.
Likewise, all the different sentient beings, in their pleasure and their pain, Have a wish to be happy that is the same as mine.
The suffering that I experience Does not cause any harm to others.
But that suffering because of my conceiving of Thereby it becomes unbearable.
Likewise, the misery of others Does not befall me.
Nevertheless, by conceiving of “I.” their suffering becomes Le ming; Therefore, it too should be hard to bear, hence I should dispel the misety of others “Because it is suffering, just like my own, And I should benefit others Because they are sentient beings, just like myself.
When both myself and others are similar in that we wish to be happy, Whit is so special about me?
Why do I strive for my happiness alone?
And when both myself and others are similar in that we do not wish to suffer, What is so special about me?
Why do I protect myself and not others?
Why should I protect them, if their suffering does not cause me any harm?    Then why protect myself against future suffering, If it causes me no harm now?
It is a mistaken conception to think that I shall experience .
For it is another person who dies, And another that will be reborn.
Surely whenever there is suffering The must protect themselves from it- Yet the suffering of the foot is not that of the hand, Why then does one protect the other?
Although this may not be justified, It is done because of grasping at a self- Yet surely whatever is not justified for myself or others should at all costs be rejected.
Such things as a continuum and an aggregation are false in the same way as prayer beads and an army.
There is no owner of suffering, Therefore who has control over it?
There being no owner of suffering, : There can be no distinction at all between.
Thus I shall dispel it because it hurts.
Why am I so certain “But , why should I turn away the misery of all? ‘
This is no ground for argument, for if I prevent my own, surely I should prevent the of all.
If not, since I am just like sentient beings,.
Since this compassion will bring me much misery, Why should I exert myself to develop it?
Should I contemplate the suffering of living creatures, How could the misery of compassion be more?
If, by one person’ suffering, The suffering of many would be destroyed, Surely kindhearted people would accept it For the sake of themselves and others?
Thus the Bodhisattva Supushpa chandra, although awate of the harm the king would cause him, accepted his own suffering in order to eradicate the miseries of many? .
Thus, because they love to pacify the pains of others, "Those whose minds are attuned in this way Would enter even the deepest hell Just as a wild goose plunges into a lotus pool.
Will not the ocean of joy that shall exist when all beings are free Be sufficient for me?
What am I doing wishing for my liberation alone?
Therefore, although working for the benefit of others, I should not be conceited ot wonderful.
And because of the joy there is in solely doing this, I should have no hope for any ripening-effect.
Therefore, just as I protect myself From unpleasant things however small, In the same way I should act towards others With a compassionate and caring mind.
Although the basis is quite impersonal, Through familiarity I have come to regard The drops of sperm and blood of othets as “I”.. So in the same way, why should I be unable To regard the bodies of others as “I?
Hence it is not difficult to see That my body is also that of others.
Having seen the mistakes in myself And the ocean of good in others, I shall completely reject all selfishness And accustom myself to accepting others.
In the same way as the hands and so forth Are regarded as limbs of the body, Likewise, why are embodied creatures Not regarded as limbs of life?
Through acquaintance has the thought of “I” arisen Towards this impersonal body; So in a similar way, why should it not arise "Towards other living beings?
When I work in this way for the sake of others, I should not let conceit or wonderful arise.
It is just like feeding myself I hope for nothing in return.
Therefore, just as I protect myself From unpleasant things, however slight, In the same way, I should habituate myself to have a compassionate and caring mind towards others.
It is out of his great compassion ‘That the Lord Avalokiteshvara has blessed his name To dispel the nervousness Of being among other people.
I should not turn away from what is difficult; for by the power of familiarity, I may be made unhappy even when someone Whose name once frightened me is not around.
Thus whoever wishes to quickly afford protection To both the self and other beings Should practice that holy secret: The exchanging of self for others.
Because of attachment to my body, Even a small object of fear frightens me.
So who would not revile, as an enemy, This body that gives tise to fear?
By wishing for a means to remedy The hunger, thirst and sickness of the body, I might kill birds, fish and deer and loiter by the sides of roads .
If, for the sake of its profit and comfort, I would kill even my father and mother, and steal the property of the triple Gem, then I would undoubtedly proceed to burn in the flames of the deepest hell.
Therefore what adept would desire, protect and venerate this body?
Who would not scotn it And regard it as an enemy? “
If I give this, what shall I enjoy?”
Such selfish thinking is the way of ghosts; “If I enjoy this, what shall I give?”
Such selfless thinking is a quality of the gods.
If, for my own sake, I cause harm to othets, I shall be tormented in hellish realms; But if, for the sake of othets, I cause harm to myself, I shall acquire all that is magnificent.
By holding myself in high esteem I shall find myself in unpleasant realms, ugly and stupid; But should this be shifted to others, I shall acquite honors in a joyful realm.
If T employ others for my own purposes, I myself shall experience servitude; But if I use myself for the sake of others, I shall experience only lordliness.
Whatever joy there is in this world all comes from desiring others to be happy, and whatever suffering there is in this world all comes from desiring oneself to be happy.
What need is there to say much more?
The childish work for their own benefit, The Buddhas work for the benefit of others.
Just look at the difference between them!
If I do not actually exchange my happiness For the sufferings of others, I shall not attain the state of Buddhahood .
And even in cyclic existence shall have no joy.
Let alone what is beyond this world.
Because my servants do no work and because my mastets give me no pay, Even the needs of this life will not be fulfilled.
establishes both foreseeable and unforeseeable joy, I cast magnificent delight completely aside And then, because of inflicting misery on othets, In confusion I seize hold of unbearable pain.
I f all the injury, : Fear and pain in this world arise from grasping at a self, Then what use is that great ghost to me?
If I do not completely forsake it I shall be unable to put an end to suffering, just as I cannot avoid being burned if I do not cast aside the fire .
Therefore, in order to allay the harms inflicted upon me and in order to pacify the sufferings of othets, I shall give myself up to others And chetish them as I do my very self.
I am under the control of others,” Of this, mind, you must be certain; Now, except for benefitting every creature, You must not think of anything else.
For my sake, I should not do anything With these eyes and so forth, which I have left at the disposal of others.
It is quite incorrect to do anything with them which is contrary to the benefit .
Thus sentient beings should be my main .
Whatever I behold upon my body I should rob and use for the benefit of others.
Considering lesser beings and so forth as myself, And considering myself as the other, I should meditate upon envy, competitiveness and self-importance, With a mind free of distorted concepts: “He is honored, but I am not; I have not found wealth such as he.
He is praised, but I am despised; He is happy, but I suffer.
I have to do all the work, While he remains comfortably at rest.
He is renowned as great in this world, but I as inferior, with no good qualities at all.
But what do you mean I have no good qualities?
I have all good qualities.
Compared to many, he is inferior, And compared to many, I am high.
But I am not being healed by him, So why does he belittle me?
What use are his good qualities to me?
he has good qualities, “With no compassion for the beings Who dwell in the poisonous mouth of harmful realms, externally he is proud of his good qualities And wishes to put down the wise. “
In order that I may excel He who is regarded as equal with me, I shall definitely strive to attain material gain and honor for myself, : Even verbal dispute. “
By all means, I shall make clear to the entire world All the good qualities I have, But I shall not let anyone hear Of any good qualities he may have. “
Also I shall hide all my faults; I will be venerated, but not he; I will find a great deal of material gain; I will be honored, but he shall not. “
For a long time I shall look with pleasure at his being made inferior; he will become the laughing-stock of all, regarded among everyone as an object of scorn and derision. “
It is said that this deluded one Is trying to compete with me, But how can he be equal with me In learning, intelligence, form, class or wealth? “
Thus, upon hearing of my good qualities That have been made well-known to all, I shall thoroughly enjoy the satisfaction Of the pleasant, tingling sensation that occurs. “
Even though he has some possessions, If he is working for me, I shall give him just enough to live on, And by force I'll take . “
His happiness and comfort will decline And I shall always cause him harm, For hundreds of times in this cycle of rebirth He has caused harm to me.”
Because of desiring to benefit yourself, O mind, All weariness you have gone through 0ver countless past aeons : Has only succeeded in achieving misery.
Therefore, I shall definitely engage myself in working for the benefit of others, for since the words of the mighty one ate infallible, I shall behold its advantages in the future.
If, in the past, I had practiced : This act , A situation such as this, devoid of the magnificence and bliss of a Buddha, could not possibly have come about.
Therefore, just as I have come to hold as “I” These drops of sperm and blood of others, Likewise, through acquaintance I should also come to regard all others.
Having thoroughly examined myself others , I shall steal whatever appears on my body and use it for the benefit of others.
I am happy but others are sad, I am high though others are low; I benefit myself but not others.”
Why am I not envious of myself?
I must separate myself from happiness And take upon myself the sufferings of othets. “
Why am I doing this now?”
In this way, I should examine myself for faults.
Although others may do something wrong, I should transform it into a fault of my own; but should I do something even slightly wrong, I shall openly admit it to many people.
By further describing the renown of others, I should make it outshine my own.
Just like the lowest kind of servant, I should employ myself for the benefit of all.
I should not praise my naturally fault-ridden self For some temporary good quality it may have, I shall never let even a few people know Of any good qualities I may possess.
In brief, for the sake of living creatures, May all the harms I have selfishly caused to others descend upon me myself.
I should not be dominating and aggressive, acting in a self-righteous, arrogant way; Instead, like a newly married bride, I should be bashful, timid and restrained.
Thus, O mind, you should and abide in this way And not act as.
If, under the control you transgress , your will be yout end.
However, mind, although you have been advised, If you do not act in a like manner, Then since all misfortunes will entrust themselves to you, You will only be destined to destruction.
That previous time when you could overcome me is now past; Now I see , And wherever you go I shall destroy your arrogance.
I should immediately cast aside all thoughts of working for my own sake.
By having sold you to others, I shall not become discouraged, but shall offer up all your strength.
If, having become unconscientious, I do not give you to all living beings, - Tt is certain that you will deliver me To the guardians of the hells.
For ages have you dealt with me like this And I have suffered Jong; But now; recalling all my grudges, I shall overcome your selfish thoughts.
Likewise, if I wish to be happy, I should not be happy with myself; And similarly, if I wish to be protected I should constantly protect all others.
Why do I grasp this unbearable and unclean form as “I”?
How is it different from a clod of earth?
O why do I not dispel this pride !
Having accumulated suffering for no purpose Because of my honoring and serving this body, What use is attachment and anger For this thing that is similar to a piece of wood?
Whether I am caring for my body in this way, Or whether it is being eaten by vultures, it has no attachment or hatred towards these things why then am I so attached to it?
If knows no anger when derided and no pleasure when praised, for what reason am I wearing myself out like this?
Yet I want this body of mine, Both it and I are friends Since all beings want their bodies, Why do I not find joy in theirs?
Therefore, in order to benefit all beings I shall give up this body without any attachment.
Although it may have many faults, I should look after it while experiencing “actions.
So enough of this childish behavior!
I shall follow in the steps of the wise, and having recalled the advice concerning conscientiousness, I shall turn away sleep and mental dullness.
Just like the compassionate Children of the Conqueror, I shall patiently accept what I have to do; " For if I do not make a constant effort day and night, When will my misery ever come to an end?
Therefore, in order to dispel the obscurations, I shall withdraw my mind from mistaken ways And constantly place it in equipoise Upon the perfect object.
All of these practices were taught By the Mighty One for the sake of wisdom.
Therefore, those who wish to pacify suffering Should generate this wisdom.
I. Recognition of the nature of wisdom A. Ascertaining the two truths Deceptive truths, so called because they ate truths established from the point of view of deceived minds that obscure the real meaning, and ultimate truths, so called because they are truths comprehended by a superior’s wisdom to which no appeat, are anepted as the two truths.
Ultimate truths are not objects experienced by the mind, but bére “the mind” is to be understood as the deceptive that obscures one from seeing ultimate truths.
Common pegple consider the body to be a unit, the mind to be permanent and so forth.
Yagis, however, contradict with reasonings such as: “The body is not a unit because it has many parts,” and “The mind is not permanent because it changes into something else.”
Furthermore, among the yogis, i.e. the proponents of external existence,” the Chittamatrins® and the Madhyamikas, there are differences in their understanding of the nature of knowable entities.
Thereby those with the higher views progressively contradict those with lower views.

Therefore, what reason would thete be to practice them for that purpose?
Answer: Although they ate similar in appearance, common people bebold forms and other such #hings and conceive of them to be really existent; they do norunderstand them to be ke an illusion.
However, since yogis do understand them to exist in such a way, it is here that the yogis and the common people disagree.
Question: Since forms and so forth are established by swe perception, isn’t it contradictory to say that they are false?
Answer: There is no contradiction, because sh things are merely worldly conventions, but they are not true for a valid cognition.
This is just like the unclean body being known deceptively as clean.
In fact, such a cognition is false.
Answer: Such statements have to be interpreted.
However, in actuality such things are not truly momentary.
Question: Doesn't this contradict the statement that to see the momentaty is to see Truth itself?
Otherwise, if in comparison to the yogis, the common people saw reality, then the yogis definite understanding of the uncleanliness of a woman's body would be contradicted by the worldly person's apprehension of it as clean.
Answer: In the same way that, for you, truly existent merits occur from worshipping a truly existent Conqueror, similarly, for us, illusion-like merits are obtained from venerating an illusion-like Conqueror.
Question: Yet if sentient beings were like an illusion, then after they die, how would they be reborn?
Answer: For as Jong as the necessary conditions are assembled, for that dong even illusions will secure.
Why, merely by their longer duration, should sentient beings be more real than illusions?
And would not charity between sentient beings and charity between illusory people be equivalent virtues?
Answer: Becanse an illusory person who kills or gives something to another illusory person has no mind, no transgression ot virtue acsrues from his actions.
Because the mantras and so forth that cause illusions do not have the ability to produce minds, illusory minds are not produced from them, whereas the causes for sentient beings do have the ability to produce minds.
Although false, the different result depend upon different causes; in this way, the illusions that atise from a variety of different conditions also vary.
They are produced from different causes, but nowhere is there one condition which has the ability to produce all the effects.
Question: If uhimately, all sentient beings are by nature in the state beyond sorrow although deceptively they are in cyclic excistence, then for the same reason, since, in terms of appearance, the Buddha would be in cyclic existence, what would be the use of the Bodbisattva’s way of life?
Answer: If their conditions are not discontinued, even illusions will not cease to be.
2. Refuting the objections of the chittamatring concerning Ultimate Truths chittamatrin: If no deceived consciousnesses exist, then whatcan refer to the iltusion-like appearances?
Madhyamika: If illusion-like objects are not teal for you, what can be referred to?
Chittamatrin: Although objects do not really exist, consciousness does truly exist.
Therefore, since the images which appear are the mind itself, they are suitable to be referred to .
Madhyamika: If he mind itself and the illusion-like objects ate one substance, then, since there would be no beholder and no beheld, what wonld be beheld by whar ?
Ir has been said by the Protector of the World himself that the mind does not have the ability to behold the mind.
Just as the blade of a sword cannot cut itself, likewise the mind cannot behold itself?
Chittamatrin: Just as a light completely illuminates itself, so does the mind know itself.
Madhyamika: The fight does not illuminate itself, becanse something that is to be illuminated has to first of all be unilluminated, but as soon as the light is little is never obscured by any darkness.
Chittamatrin: Take for example two kinds of blueness: blueness that appears in dependence upon another blue colored object, the bine reflected a clear piece of glass, and blueness that does or appear in dependence upon something else, like the natural color of blue in lapis lazuli, Likewise, some objects such as jugs depend npon other things such as lights that illuminate them and consciousnesses that know them, whereas such things as lights and feelings of pleasure and pain are beheld without any such dependence.
Madhyamika: This is not so because, since the blueness of la- pis lazuli is established as blueness as soon as it comes into be- ing, it is not something which, previously having not been blue, makes itself blue.
Therefore, this example is unsuitable to illustrate self-illumination and self-cognition.
Conventionally, spon being perceived by conscionsness, i can be said that a light illuminates itself, but ultimately, upon being perceived by what can it be satd that the mind illuminates itself?
Thus the example and what it illustrates are not comparable.
Since ultimately neither self-cognition fior other-cognition are estab- lished , no mind at all can bebold .
Thus it is meaningless to discuss whether such a mind has the quality of iuminating itself or not.
Since we could have no such memory, the existence of self-cognition is established by the reason of .
From this he indirectly remembers similar .
Chittamatrin: If someone with the necessary cansal conditions such as concentration can see the consciousnesses of others from afar, zherefore it must be possible to ckarly behold one’s own consciousness which is SO neat.
Madhyamika: This is not necessatily so, because although from application of an eye-lotion powerful attainments, treasure vases can be seen far beneath the earth, she eye-lotion itself, which is much closer, cannot be seen.
Chittamatrin: If self-cognition were non-existent, other-cognitions would also be non-existent.”
Therefore, there would be no such thing as seeing, hearing and so forth.
Madhyamika: The mere appearances of seeing, hearing and percesying are not being negated here.
It is the conception of them as truly existent that is to be reversed, since this is the canse for suffering.
Madhyamika: If something is a thing, how can it be neither the mind nor other than it?
Otherwise, if it did not have something real as its basis, it would be just like space and would not could appear as teal subjects and objects.
It would follow that it could not because real, things do not exist.
B. Establishing as the path the knowledge that deceptive truths are like illusions question: Even if one knows that all phenomena are ike an illusion, how will disturbing conceptions be turned away?
For instance, a magician who creates an Nsory woman can still have desire for ber.
Answer: The creator of this illusion has not abandoned the tendencies of the disturbing conception of desire towards knowable entities such as women.
Therefore, when be sees the illusory woman, the tendency emptiness is very weak.
At this time, it will be impossible for any disturbing conceptions to occur.
Question: If this were the case, then because he would not reflect, “I shall do this,” how could the Buddha act for the benefit of others?
Madhyamika: Then how are your scriptures established as credible?
Madhyamika: Then first, ptior to your acceptance of your tenets, your scriptures cannot have been the word of Buddha, because at that time they were #o# established as the word of Buddha for you.
Furthermore, 4 you accept something as fae simply besanse two people accept it, then you should also accept the Vedas and other non-Buddhist scriptures as tue, credible scriptures.
Vaibashika: The Mahayana scriptures are not credible because they are disputed Madhyamika:” however, since all your scriptures are disputed by the non- Buddhist and some of them by other Buddhist schools, you should reject your own sctiptures, too.
If it is so, since these three trainings are taught in most Mahayana scriptures such as the ‘Samdhinirmochana Sutra’, they are therefore similar to your scriptures.
Why then do yon not accept them as the word of the Buddha?
Vaibashika: If Mahayana texts such as the ‘Prajnaparamita Sutras’ were the word of Buddha, surely the great Kashyapa and the other Arhats would have understood them.
Since they did not, they cannot be the word of the Buddha.
Therefore, just because you do not understand them, who would regard this as a reason for not accepting them as the word of the Buddha?
Therefore, since they would not have abandoned suffering, would be hard for them have attained the state beyond sorrow.
Vaibashika: Although they temporarily ate not freed from suffering, as soon as they abandon their disturbing conceptions, they will be freed when they leave their bodies because they definitely do not have any craving for the aggregates of body and mind, which is principal condition for conditioned existence.
will still conceive of some objects.
Therefore, those who wish to put an end to all suffering should meditate on emptiness.
When one understands emptiness, compassion should atise for these who experience suffering as a result of being confused about emptiness.
The remedy for the darkness of the obscurations of disturbing conceptions, as well as the obscuration to the kunowable, is meditation on emptiness.
Therefore, why do these who wish to quickly obtain omniscience not meditate on emptiness?
Objection: I do not want to meditate upon emptiness, because it frightens me.
Reply: It would be correct to be afraid of that which actually produces suffering, the apprehension of #rue existence, but why be afraid of meditat- ing on emptiness if it pacifies all suffering? II.
A General Refutation of Personal Identity If a self existed, it would be justifiable 7 be afraid af any object at all, but since such a self does not exist, who is there to becowse afraid?
Teeth, hair and nails are not the self, the self is not bones nor blood: it is neither mucus nor is it phiegn; nor is it fymph nor pus.’
The self is not Jat nor sweat; the lungs and liver also are not the self; neither are any of the other inner organs; nor is the self excrement or urine.
Flesh and skin are not the self; warmth and energy-winds are not the self; neither are bodily cavities the self and at 10 time are the six fypes of consciousness the self the reason for this is because all six psychophysical categories are impermanent, multiple and not autonomous. 2.
A Refutation of the self postulated by the Samkhya School Madhyamika: If the consciousness that apprehends sound wore a permanent, there would be a conscious apprehension of sound at all times even when sound was absent.
If there can be a consciousness that apprehends sound, even though there is no conscionsness of sound, it would follow that even a piece of wood could become a consciousness of sound.
Therefore, without an object of consciousness remaining close by, we can definitely say that there is no consciousness that apprehends it.
These two consciousniesses are one thing, Madhyamika: In this case, at the time of hat consciousness of visual-form why is no sound heard?
Samkhya: It is not heard because no sound exists in the proximity.
Madhyamika: Therefore a conscious apprehension of it conld not possibly exist.
How can something whose nature it is to apprehend sound ever apprehend visual forms?
It could not, because their aspects are mutually exclusive.
This is Zke one person who, in relation to his father and his son respectively, is posited as a son and a father.
The apprehension of a visual-form does not exist as az apprehension of sound because if it existed with that nature it would surely be apparent, whereas it is never seen as such.
Samkhya: For example, just as one actor has many different roles, the previous apprehension of sound is later seen in another way, i.e. as an apprehension of visual-form.
Madhyamika: Then the consciousness can no longer be permanent, because it keeps on changing into something else.
Samkhya: Although appears in other ways, its nature remains the same as before and is permanent.
Samkhya: Consciousness appears other ways, and although the are not true, is one and true.
Madhyamika: Please tell us, what is this nature that is one and true?
Samkhya: It is the nature of merely being conscions that is one and true.
They cannot, because it is illogical for the general aspect of something to be true when all the particular aspects are false. 3.
This would not be possible.
4. Rejection of Arguments Concerning Identitylessness Question: If the self were not permanent, zhe relation between the action and its effect, i.e. the doer of the action coming to experience the results of the actions committed, would not be maintained.
Therefore whose action would that be?
They do not have different bases upon which the causal action is committed and the result is expetienced.
Objection: However, it says in one scripture: “How will someone else experience the results of the actions one commits?
Answer: This statement is to be interpreted as follows: while actually considering the same continuity taught that the doer of the action is the experiencer of the result in order to prevent people denying the law of karmic cause and effect.
Actually this is not so, because a permanent self is non-existent.
Question: Why is there no permanent self?
For example, when the trunk of a plantain tree is split into parts there is no essence found at all.
Likewise, when analytically searched for with reasoning, a truly existent seff cannot be found .
Question: If there were no sentient beings, towards whom could compassion be developed?
Answer: Although sentient beings do not truly exist, deceptively one should develop compassion for those imputed by he confused mind which bas promised to practice the way of life in order to lead them to the goal of liberadon.
Question: Yet if sentient beings do not exist, who will obtain the results of developing compassion?
Objection: Since compassion is both a subjective state to which things appear in a false way and a mind confused about phenomena, surely it is equally fit to be rejected as is confusion about the self.
Answer: In order to completely pacify suffering one need not and cannot reject compassion, therefore one should not reject this merely apparent confusion about the results.
However, the confusion about the self should be rejected because it imereases such things as self-importance, which are causes for suffering, Objection: Yet there are no means to reject this confusion.
Answer: There ate, because he supreme remedy fot it is meditation upon identitylessuess.
Close Placement of Mindfulness on the Body The body is neither feet nor calves; thighs and the waist are not the body; the abdomen and back are not the body; and neither are the chest and shoulders the body.
The ribs and the bands are not the body; armpits and the nape af the neck are not the body; all inner organs are not the body; neither the head or the neck are the body.
Therefore, what truly existent body is there among these parts?
If the body abided in all its limbs equally in all directions, indeed I could say that a// the parts of the body abide in the parts of its limbs, but where could the partless, truly existent body itself abide?
And if the entire, truly existent body abided separately in each of the individual pars, such as the hands, then there would have to be as many bodies as there were parts.
If there is no truly existent body outside or within, how could the bands and so forth have such a body at all?
Also, since it is not something different from the hands and other parts, how could a separate body, unrelated to its parts, exis?
Therefore the body is not truly existent, but through being confused about its bands and other parts, a mind that mistakes them for a body arises.
However, the body does not truly exist in the way it is apprehended by that mind.
It is like the mind apprehending a pile of stones as a man because of their being set up in a form similar to a man’s.
Just as the body as a whole is not truly existent, bow can the hands be truly existent?
They are only a composite of fingers.
Likewise then these parts are divided into atomic particles and the atomic particles into their directional parts, they are revealed as multiples and thus cannot be truly existent units.
Hence they are found to be as empty as space, and so even atomic particles can have no true existence.
Therefore who, having analyzed it, would be attached to this dream- like form?
And when in this way the body is not truly existent, bow can the distinction be made into male and female bodies? 2.
Conversely, if happiness had true existence, why do those suffering greatly from grief and sickness not find any joy in’ delicions foods and the like?
Madhyamika: Yet, simply because it lacks the defining characteristic of a feeling, namely experience, how can something which is not of the nature of an experience be a feeling?
Answer: It is feeling because where is an experience of a very subtle pain.
The nature of this subtle pain is a slight, weak feeling of happiness distinct Jrom the gross sensation of pleasure.
If pain is not occurring in someone’ mind because its opposite is occurring, then fo consider what has not occurred is be a feeling is surely what could only be called a mistaken conception.
Therefore, as a remedy for such mistaken conceptions, one should cultivate the wisdom which analyzes the non-true existence of all phenomena.
The state of absorption that arises from the field of what is examined by this mind is the nourishment that sustains be yogis understanding of the way things exist.
They would be like a mountain in the east and a mountain in the west.
If there were no space at all, then since they would become one unit, what could meet what?
There would be no meeter and nothing to be met with.
This is so because atomic particles have #o space inside and are completely equal in size.
Were they to meet, they would have to do so in this way, because without one atomic particle entering into another, there could be no mixing of the two, and without this mixing there could not possibly be any meeting on all sides.
And how would it be logical for those who accept the existence of a parthess atomic particle to say that it is met on one particular side by another atom?
If that were the case, the partless atomic patticle would have one part which is met with, and another part which is not met at all.
However, if you ever see an atomic particle that has no parts but can still be met with, please show it to us!
It also follows that it is illogical to meet conscionsness because i is not physical.
Objection: Although there is no physical meeting, there does exist a mere aggregation to produce the effect.
Answer: This is invalid because, just as we analyzed before, an aggregation ir not found to be a truly existent thing.
If in this way contact, the cause for feeling, is not existent, from what do feelings, the effect, arise?
Thus what is the purpose of tiring oneself ont for the sake of obtaining pleasurable feelings?
And likewise, whose mind could be caused any harm by what painful feelings?
Both the pleasure which is obtained and the pain which harms have no true existence.
When there is no identity of the person that feels and no feelings either, having seen this situation, why do I not turn away the craving to obtain pleasure and to be separated from pain?
Since the sense objects that I sez and touch appear to me but have no true existence, their nature is ke a dream and an illusion.
Feelings are not seen by the mind which arises simultaneously with them because, since #bey are produced simultaneously with i, they would be unrelated to it.
Likewise, previons feelings and later feelings can be remembered and wished for, but they cannot acinally be experienced by the mind because they have either ceased or are yet to be produced.
Because there would be no experiencer and nothing experienced, they cannot experience themselves, and if of the past, present and future, nothing else can experience them either.
Therefore no experiencer of feelings exists and thus no truly existent feelings exist either.
So how can this identityless collection of aggregates be benefitted by pleasurable feelings and harmed by painful ones?
It cannot, because beneficial and harmful feelings do not truly exist. 3.
Neither does a mind exist either inside or outside the body, and it is not to be found elsewhere. This is neither the body nor truly other than it; if is not mixed with it nor entirely separate from it; the mind is not in the slightest bit truly existent.
Therefore all sentient beings have from the very beginning been in the natural Nirvana.
Answer: Well, let us first consider whether they exist prior to, simultneously with or after their objects.
At that time there could be no objects because they would still have to be produced.
Even if ze conscionsness and what it is conscious of arose simultaneously, still, having referred to what object contd the consciousness arise?
And if the consciousness came into existence affer the object of which it is conscions, then from what object could it arise?
4. Close Placement of Mindfulness on Phenomena in this way, by means of the above reasoning, one will come to understand that all phenomena do not truly arise.
5. Rejection of Arguments Objection: If, in this way, all phenomena do not arise; since there would be no deceptive truths which arise and petish, bow could two truths be presented in the Madhyamika tradition?
This deception is a distorted conception in the mind of someone who has not passed into the state beyond sorrow; it is not the deceptive mind of one who has passed beyond sorrow.
Later, when the state of Nirvana is attained, if #hat deceptive conception were ascertained to exist, would exist a deceptive truth; but since this does not exist Nirvana does not exist deceptive truth.
Objection: Since the examining mind and the examined object are mutually dependent upon one another, if the object is not established, the mind, too, would be non-existent.
Therefore your analysis would be invalid.
If it were necessaty fo analyze the analytic mind with another truly existent analytic mind, then that analytic mind, too, would have to be analyzed by yet another analytic mind.
Therefore, since this process would never reach at end, the basic object of analysis would never be ascertained.
When the object of analysis has been analyzed and established to be empty, he analytic mind is found not to have a object as its basis.
Thus because there is no truly existent object, even without analysis a truly existent analytic mind cannot arise from it.
This state of peace in which no truly existent objects not consciousnesses arise is called Nirvana, the state beyond sorrow. III.
However, they are in a very difficult position because there is no proof for their assertion, whereas it can be refuted.
Realist: The true existence of the object is established from the truly existent sense faculties of consciousness.
Madhyamika: What can be established as truly existent in dependence upon a truly existent consciousness?
Realist: On the other hand, we can also say that consciousness is established from the objects it is conscious of.
Madhyamika: What can depend upon a existent object of conscions?
If they mutually existed through the force of one another, then when one is not established , the other will also not be established.
And in that case, they would both be non- exiszent.
For example, if 'someone has son, he cannot be established as a father, and also if there is no one established as the father, where can the child come from?
In this way, since without a child there is no father and without a father no child, in both cases there can be neither.
For example, since a sprout is produced from a seed we can understand the existence of the seed from the sprout even though the sprout depends upon it.
Likewise, why can we not understand that there is a existent object of consciousness from the consciousness which is produced from if?
Madhyamika: This is not the same thing.
The existence of the seed can be understood by seeing the sprout with a consciousness that is other.
Tt is impossible to cognize a truly existent consciousness.
B. Establishing emptiness of true existence from the viewroint of the cause 1.
it is understood through inference that the variety among effects, such as the different stems of lotus flowers, is produced becanse of their having z variety of causes.
Madhyamika: By a variety of previous causes.
Charvaka: For what reason is a distinct cause able to produce a distinct effect?
Madhyamika: This comes from the force of its previous canse. 2.
Moreover, exactly what effects is Ishvara asserted to produce?
Naiyayika: He creates the seff, the atomic particles of the earth element and so forth, as well as the later continuity of himself.
Madhyamika: Yes?
don’t you accept the nature of these things fo be permanent?
If you do, it is contradictory to say that they are produced.
from a beginningless series of previous cognitions.
Pleasure and pain, 100, are produced from wholesome and unwholesome actions, respectively.
Therefore please tell me what effects are produced by Ishvara.
If the cause, Ishvara, the permanent producer of effects, has no beginning, how can the effects of pleasure and so forth have a beginning?
According to you, they should exist in this way, but in reality they are clearly occasional phenomena.
Therefore upon what does his production of effects depend?
This is so because, once the causes and conditions were assebled, Ishvara would have na power not to produce the effects, and without these he would have no power to produce effects.
If effects were produced without the desire of Ishvara, it would follow that they were under the power of something other than him.
Eren if effects were created according to bis desires, their production would be dependent upon his desires.
The Vaisheshikas assert that both the animate and inanimate worlds are produced by permanent atomic particles.
This assertion cannot be accepted because we have already refuted permanent atomic patticles above.
Among these two, the self is neither a cause nor an effect, whereas the permanent, pattless, material, invisible and all-creating primal substance is asserted to be the canse of the world.
They speak of a balanced state of the three qualities of equanim- ity, pleasure and pain, called ‘purity, ‘activity, Darkness, as being the primal substance.
Madhyamika: This primal substance you accept cannot be existent, because 41 is impossible for something that is truly partless to truly exist with a threefold nature.
Likewise, the qualities cannor truly exist as three becatse each of them has three aspects.
This latter reason is established because you accept that every truly existent phenomenon has the nature of the three qualities.
Furthermore if the three qualities the cause do not exist, the existence of the phenomena, such as sound, that are manifested from them as effects becomes exiremely farfetched.
It is not possible for clothing and the like have the same nature of pleasure and so forth, because they have a conscions quality.
Madhyamika: However, things such as clothing are similar to the body, and have we not already refuted of the body with out analysis?
Furthermore, in your tradition the gause for clothing and so forth is asserted to be the three qualities of pleasure and so forth.
Woollen cloth does not arise from pleasure.
Moreover, upon analysis the woollen cloth the cause have ns true existence and therefore pleasure, its effect, can also have no true existence.
Pleasure and the other feelings can never be apprehended as permanent because they ate occasional phenomena.
If pleasure were atways manifestly present, then why is it not also experienced at times when pain is produced?
experienced because it becomes very subthe.
Madhyamika: How can something permanent be sometimes gross and sometimes subtle?
Since it becomes subtle upon ceasing to be gross, this alternately gross and subtle feeling must be impermanent.
For similar reasons, why do you not accept that all manifest things are impermanens?
Samkhya: Although the various gross and subtle states of pleasure are impermanent, the nature of pleasure itself is permanent.
Thus while you do not accept the production of manifest entities that were previously non-existent, you do claim that must abide because, although at that previous time they are in an un-manifest state, later they arise in a manifest form.
However, if the effect abided in the canse, to eat food would be to eat excrement, and you should purchase and wear cotton seeds with the money you pay for clothing, Samkhya: Although things do exist in this way, confused people of the world do not wear cotton seeds because they cannot see clothing in them.
Thus this must have been due for him as well.
Furthermore, because’ in your tradition a Knower of Trath the effect mwonid exist in a worldly person the cause mwhy do worldly people not see clothing in cotton seeds?
It follows that they should.
Therefore they do not understand.
Yt must be.
Therefore meditation upon the ultimate of emptiness is surely incorrect.
And because nontrue existence is dependent upon true existence, the non-true existence that is a negation gf ze fulse excistence also is clearly false.
For example, when his child dies in a dreams, the dreamer’s thought of the child’s non-existence causes the thought of the child’s existence to cease.
Although the thought of his non-existence is false, it still has the ability to abandon the thought of his existence. 3.
Summary Therefore, when such an analysis is made with these reasonings, impermanent thing exist with no cause, and no individual cause or condition arany assembly of conditions have existed from the very beginning.
Since do not come anew from else, in the beginning they ate not produced, in the middle they remain, and in the end they do not go elsewhere upon cessation.
How, then, are all these things, which under analysis are not established, although they are apprehended as true by confused minds, not different from illusions?
They appeat to be truly existent, whereas in fact they are not. 4.
Since it is a product of causes and conditions, it is similar to a reflection in a mirror; so bow can it have true existence?
C. Establishing emptiness of true existence from the point of view of the effect what would be the need of a canse for a thing that existed? ,
it would already exist.
And what would be the need of a cause for it if it didn't excist ar all, it would not be the effect of anything, Objection: Although a cause cannot make a non-existent arise on a non-thing, it can change into a thing Reply: This is illogical; even by means of a hundred million causes, a non-thing cannot be transformed into anything else because it is permanent.
If it were able to change, it would have to do so either while retaining its non-thingness, or through discarding it.
In the former instance, how could it become a thing as long as its condition remained unseparated from being a non-thing?
And in the second instance, what is there that could separate itself from the state of a non-thing and then become a thing?
This is an impossibility.
In which. case, when could a thing ever come to exis?
Also in the case of a non-thing becoming a thing upon having first discarded the condition of a non-thing.
Without actually becoming a thing, a non-thing cannot be separated from the state of a non-thing, and of it has not become separate from this state, it is impossible for the state of an excistent thing to arise.
Similarly, a thing does not become a non-thing upon cessation, because would absurdly follow that something with one nature would become twofold.
In this way there is no cessation or production of things.
Therefore all beings never have a birth nor a cessation.
Although sentient beings appear, they are not truly existent, just like dream.
And since they are found to have no essence upon anajysis, they are also like a plaintain tree.
Therefore, in their being there is no difference between the state beyond sorrow Nirvana and the state not beyond sorrow cyclic existence.
The results of wisdom What is there to gain and what is there to lose With things that ate empty in this vay Who is there to pay me respect, And who is there to abuse me?
From what are pleasure and pain detived?
When I search for the ultimate nature, Who is there to crave, and what is there to crave for?
Upon analysis, this world of living being, therefore who can die here?
What is there to come and what has been?
Who ate friends and who are relatives?
O you , Please recognize, as I have done, that all is just like space!
Those who wish to be happy are greatly disturbed by causes for conflict And overjoyed by the causes for pleasure.
Not finding happiness, they suffer, And in order to find it, they exert themselves. ‘
They argue with others, cut and stab one another; With many wrong deeds, they live in a state of great hardship.
Even though they repeatedly come to happy existences And experience much pleasure there, Upon dying, they fall for a long time Into the unbearable sufferings of lower realms, Within conditioned existence, the chasms are many And the ultimate truth is absent.
Furthermore mutually contradict one another.
Yet if, while in conditioned existence, I do not this ultimate truth, II shall a limitless ocean of misery, Unbearable and beyond analogy.
Likewise, I have little strength And my human life is indeed very short, Also, I sttive hard to live long and avoid illness, I am hunger, rest and sleep; I am injured by others And keep meaningless company with the childish.
Therefore this life swiftly passes with no meaning, and it is very hard to find the chance to investigate reality.
In this state, where is there the means to reverse This beginningless habit of grasping at true existence?
Furthermore, devils are exerting themselves To cast us into vast unfortunate realms, They show us many mistaken paths and it is hard to resolve doubts about the perfect way.
It will be hard to find the leisure again, and extremely difficult to find the presence of the Buddhas.
It is hard to forsake this flood of disturbing conceptions.
Alas, sentient beings will continue to suffer!
O indeed, it is worth feeling sorrow For those adrift in the river of pain, who although they experience great misery are unaware of the sufferings they go through.
For example, some wash themselves again and again, and others repeatedly enter fire, but although they thereby suffer greatly, they pride themselves in being content.
Similarly, those and live as though there were no ageing or death, are first of all killed , and then experience the unbearable misery of falling into lower realms.
When shall I be able to extinguish those tormented by the fires of suffering With the rain of my accumulated happiness that has sprung from the clouds of my merits?
And by having, in the manner of not referring, respectfully gathered the accumulation of metit, When, by referring to the other, will I be able to reveal emptiness To those who are wretched and sad?
Chapter X: Dedication Through the virtue of having composed this work, A Guide to the Bodbisattva’s way of Life, may all living beings come to engage In the Bodhisattva’s conduct.
May all beings everywhere, Plagued with sufferings of body and mind, obtain an ocean of happiness and joy By virtue of my merits.
For as long as they remain in cyclic existence, May their happiness never decline, And may all of them, uninterruptedly, receive Waves of joy from Bodhisattvas.
May all embodied creatures, Who throughout the universe experience hellish realms, Come to enjoy the bliss of Sukhavati.
May those feeble with cold find warmth, and may those oppressed with heat be cooled By the boundless waters that pout forth from the great clouds of the Bodhisattvas’ .
May the forest of razor-sharp leaves Become a beautiful pleasure grove, And may the trees of knives and swords grow into wish-fulfilling trees.
May the regions of hell become places of joy With vast and fragrant lotus pools, Beautiful, with the exquisite calls Of wild ducks, geese and swans.
May the heaps of burning coals change into heaps of jewels, May the burning ground become a polished crystal floor, and may the mountains of the crushing hells Become celestial palaces of worship, filled with Sugatas.
May the rains of lava, blazing stones and weapons from now on become a rain of flowers, And may all battling with weapons From now on be a playful exchange of flowers.
By the force of my virtues, may those caught in the fiery torrents of acid.
Their flesh eaten away, revealing their lily-white bones, Obtain the bodies of celestials And dwell with goddesses in gently flowing rivers. “
Why are the henchmen of Yama, the unbearable buzzards and vultures afraid?
Through whose noble strength is joy brought upon us and darkness dispelled?”
Looking up, they behold in the firmanent the radiant form of Vajrapanil Through the force of their joy, may they be free from wrongloiog and find his company.
When they see the lava fires of hell extinguished by a rain of falling flowers mixed with scented water, immediately satisfied, they wonder whose work this was; In this way, may those in hell behold padmapani. “
Friends, don’t be afraid but quickly gather here, what need is there to flee when above us is the youthful Manjughosha to dispel our fears, The tender Bodhisattva who protects all living things, ‘Through whose might all suffering is removed and the force of joy abounds. “
Behold him in an enchanting palace resounding with hymns sung by a thousand goddesses, with the tiaras of a hundred gods being offered to his lotus feet, and a rain of many flowers falling on his head, the eyes of which are moist with kindness.”
Upon seeing Manjughosha in this way, may those in hell cty out loud with joy.
Likewise, having seen, due to the roots of my wholesome deeds, The cool and sweet-smelling rain falling from joyful clouds created by the Bodhisattvas Samantabhadra and Sarva-nirvarana- vishkambhini, May all beings in hell be truly happy.
May all animals be free from the fear of being eaten by one another; may the hungry ghosts be as happy As the people of the northern Continent.
May they be satisfied By a stream of milk pouring from the hand Of the Noble Lord Avalokiteshvara, And by bathing in it, may they always be cooled.
May the blind see forms, May the deaf hear sounds, And just as it was with Mayadevi, May pregnant women give birth without any pain.
May the naked find clothing, The hungry find food; May the thirsty find water And delicious drinks.
May the poor find wealth, Those weak with sorrow find joy; May the forlorn find new hope, Constant happiness and prospetity.
May all who are sick and ill quickly be freed from their illness, And may every disease in the world never occur again.
May the frightened cease to be afraid, And those bound be freed; May the powetless find power, And may people think of benefitting one another.
May all travellers find happiness Everywhere they go, And without any effort, may they accomplish Whatever they set out to do.
May those who sail in ships and boats Obtain whatever they wish for, And having safely returned to the shore, May they joyfully reunite with their relatives.
May troubled wanderers who have lost their way Meet with fellow travellers, And without any fear of thieves and tigers, May their going be easy without any fatigue.
May those who find themselves in trackless, fearful wildernesses the children, the aged, the unprotected, those stupefied and the insane be guarded by beneficent celestials.
May beings be free from all states of no leisure and be endowed with faith, wisdom and kindness; With food and excellent conduct, may they be mindful throughout their lives.
May all beings be without want for wealth just like the treasury of space, And without dispute or harm.
May they always enjoy it as they wish. "
May those who have little splendor come to be endowed with majesty; And may those whose bodies are worn with toil find magnificent and noble forms.
May all lower life-forms in the universe take in higher forms; May the lowly obtain grandeur, And may the proud be humbled.
By the merits I , May every single being abandon all forms of wrongdoing And perpetually engage in virtue. 
May they never be parted from the Awakening Mind, - And may they always engage in the Bodhisattva’s- conduct; May they be cared for by the Buddhas And relinquish the actions of devils.
May sentient beings have lives Inconceivably long ; May they always live in contentment, Unfamiliar with even the word ‘death’.
May there abound, in all directions, Gardens of wish-fulfilling trees Filled with the sweet sound of Dharma.
Proclaimed by the Buddhas and their Children.
And may the land everywhere be pure, Smooth and devoid of any rocks, Level like the palm of the hand, And of the nature of lapis lazuli.
For all the circles of disciples, May many Bodhisattvas- Dwell in every land, Adorning them with their excellent .
May all embodied creatures Uninterruptedly hear : The sound of Dharma issuing from birds and trees, Beams of light and even space itself.
May they always meet with Buddha.
And their children the Bodhisattvas, then may these spititual masters of the world be worshipped with endless clouds of offerings.
May celestials bring timely rains So that harvests may be bountiful.
May kings act in accordance with Dharma, And the people of the world always prosper.
May all medicines be effective and the repeating of mantras successful; May dairkin, cannibals and the like Be endowed with compassionate minds.
May no living creature ever suffer, Commit wrong or ever fall ill. May no one be afraid or belittled, Or their minds ever be depressed.
In all temples and monasteries May reading and recitation flourish and remain; May the Sangha always be in harmony and may their purposes be accomplished.
May monks desiting to practice find quiet and solitary places, And through having abandoned all wandering thoughts, may they meditate with flexible minds.
May nuns be materially sufficient, abandon quattelling and be unharmed.
Similarly, may all ordained ones Never let their morality weaken.
Having repented any moral falls May transgression always be eradicated, And thereby obtaining a happy state of birth, May spititual conduct not decline even there.
May the wise be honored and may they receive alms; may their minds be completely pure, and may they be renowned in all directions.
May beings not experience the misery of lower realms and may they never know any hardships; With a physical form supetior to the gods, May they swiftly attain Buddhahood.
May sentient beings, again and again, make offerings to all the Buddhas, And may they constantly be joyful With the inconceivable bliss of the Buddhas.
Just as they intended, May the Bodhisattvas fulfill the welfare of the world, and may all sentient beings receive whatever the Buddhas have intended for them.
Similarly, may the Pratyekabuddhas and the Shravakas find happiness.
And until I reach the level of the Joyous one through the kindness of Manjughosha, May I be mindful throughout my lives, and always obtain ordination.
May I live and be sustained by simple, common foods, And in all my lives, may I find the ideal solitude.
Whenever I wish to see something or even wish to ask the slightest question, May I behold without any hindrance The Lord Manjughosha himself.
In order to fulfill the needs Of beings who reach unto the ends of ‘space, may my way of life be just like that of Manjughosha.
For as long as space endures and for as long as living beings remain, Until then may I, too, abide to dispel the misery of the world.
May all the pains of living creatures ripen upon myself; And through the might of the Bodhisattva Sangha, may all beings experience happiness.
May the teachings, which are the sole medicine for suffering And the origin of every joy, Be materially supported and honored and abide for a very long time.
I prostrate to Manjughosha through whose kindness wholesome minds ensue, and I prostrate to my spiritual masters, through whose kindness I develop.
This concludes A Guide to the Bodhisativas Way of Life, composed by Acharya Shantideva.
It was translated edited and settled upon from a Kashmiri edition by the Indian scholar Sarvajnadeva and the editor-translator monk Pal-tzeg, It was then corrected in accordance with a Magadha edition and commentary, retranslated and settled upon by the Indian scholar Dharmashribhadra and the editor-translator monk Rin-chen Zang- po and Shakya Lo-dro.
The once more, at a later time, it was further corrected, retranslated and finalized by the Indian scholar Sumatikirti and the editor-translator monk Lodan Sherab.